
P R E F A C E
1. General Financial Rules (GFRs) are a compilation of rules and orders of Government of India to be followed by
all while dealing with matters involving public finances. These rules and orders are treated as executive
instructions to be observed by all Departments and Organisations under the Government and specified Bodies
except otherwise provided for in these Rules.
2. General Financial Rules were issued for the first time in 1947 bringing together in one place all existing orders
and instructions pertaining to financial matters. These have subsequently been modified and issued as GFRs
1963 and GFRs 2005.
3. In the last few years, Government has made many innovative changes in the way it conducts its business. Reforms
in Government budgeting like removal of distinction in non-plan and plan expenditure, merger of Railway
Budget with General Budget, focusing on outcomes through an improved Outcome Budget document, all
needed to be reflected in the GFRs. Increased focus on Public Finance Management System(PFMS), reliance on
the Direct Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme to ensure efficient delivery of entitlements, introduction of new e-sites
like Central Public Procurement Portal, Government e-Marketing (GeM) Portal, Non-Tax Revenue Portal have
also necessitated revision of the existing GFRs to keep them in tune with the changing business environment. The
objective was to make the GFRs facilitate efficiency rather than create impediments in smooth and timely
implementation while following principles of accountability and procedures of financial discipline and
administrative due diligence. The Expenditure Management Commission set up in 2014 to recommend ways in
which efficiency of public expenditure could be increased has also made several recommendations especially
with respect to Autonomous Bodies. New rules on non-tax revenues, user charges, e-receipts portal have been
added in addition to the manner in which Autonomous Bodies are run.
4. The PAC in April 2015, Group of Secretaries in February 2016 and EMC in March 2016 has recommended
setting up a Task Force to review the GFRs so as to frame comprehensive rules to address the issues as highlighted
in the above para.
5. GFRs, 2017 have evolved as a result of wide consultations with Central Government Ministries and
Departments, some State Governments and other stakeholders at the Task Force stage and thereafter. The
Discussion Draft was also uploaded on the MoF’s website. Secretaries of each Department/ Ministry of
Government of India were asked to give their views for additions/ modifications, keeping in view their specific
requirements of their domain. Detailed deliberations were also carried out within the Ministry. C&AG’s
comments on the draft GFRs have also been taken into consideration.
6. The aim of any rule is to provide a framework within which an organization manages its business in a financially
prudent manner without compromising its flexibility to deal with varied situations. The GFRs 2005 have been very
comprehensively reviewed with the aim of promoting simplicity and transparency in the Government financial
system and procedures. It is expected that the new GFRs 2017 will enable an improved, efficient and effective
framework of fiscal management while providing the necessary flexibility to facilitate timely delivery of services.
7. Department of Expenditure would like to place on record the exceptional work done by the Task Force on Review
of GFRs, the office of the C&AG, the office of the CGA, Budget Division of Department of Economic Affairs, the
Ministries and Departments for their valuable inputs and its own officers for assiduously and meticulously
completing this vital and challenging exercise in a time bound manner.
(ASHOK LAVASA)
Finance Secretary &
Secretary(Expenditure)
Department of Expenditure
Ministry of Finance
North Block, New Delhi
Dated: 11th February, 2017

CONTENTS
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Chapter Name of the Chapter Page
No. No.
1 Introduction 9
2 General System of Financial Management 11
I. General Principles relating to expenditure and payment of money 12
II. Defalcation and losses 15
III.Submission of records & information 16
3 Budget formulation and implementation. 17
4 Government Accounts 25
5 Works 38
6 Procurement of Goods and Services 41
I. Procurement of Goods 41
II. Procurement of Services 54
7 Inventory Management 58
8 Contract Management 63
9 Grants-in-aid and Loans 67
10 Budgeting and Accounting for Externally Aided Projects 85
11 Government Guarantees 89
12 Miscellaneous Subjects 94
I. Establishment 94
II. Refund of revenue 96
III. Debt and misc. obligations of Govt. 97
IV. Security deposits 98
V. Transfer of land and buildings 99
VI. Charitable endowments and other trusts 99
VII. Local bodies 99
VIII. Maintenance of records 100
IX. Contingent and Miscellaneous Expenditure. 100
5
CONTENTS
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX
Appendix Subject Page
No. No.
1 Instructions for regulating the Enforcement of 102
Responsibility for losses, etc.,
2 Procedure for the preparation of Detailed Estimates of Receipts 103
3 Instructions for the preparation of Detailed Estimates of 105
expenditure from the Consolidated Fund
4 Procedure for compilation of Detailed Demands for Grants 112
5 Procedure to be followed in connection with the Demands for 115
Supplementary Grants
6 The Contingency Fund of India Rules 117
7 Transfer of Land and Buildings between the Union and 120
State Governments
8 Charitable Endowments and other Trusts 122
9 Destruction of Office Records connected with Accounts. 135
10 Check against provision of funds 144
11 Formula for Price Variation Clause 145
12 Rates of Guarantee Fee 146
FORMS
Form Description Page
Serial No. No.
GFR 1 Application for an Additional Appropriation 147
GFR 2 Revenue Receipts 148
GFR 2 - A Estimates of foreign grants 149
GFR 2 - B Estimates of interest receipts and loan repayments 150
GFR 3 Liability Register 151
GFR 3 - A Liability Statement 153
GFR 4 Statement of proposals for pre-budget discussions 156
GFR 5 Register showing expenses by Heads of Account 158
GFR 6 Broadsheet for watching receipt of account from Disbursing Officers 159
GFR 7 Compilation Sheet 160
6
CONTENTS
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Form Description Page
Serial No. No.
GFR 8 Consolidated Accounts 161
GFR 9 Broadsheet for watching Receipt of the Returns from the Heads of 162
Departments under a Department of the Central Government
GFR 10 Report of Surplus, Obsolete and Unserviceable Stores for Disposal 163
GFR 11 Sale Account 164
GFR 12 - A Form of Utilization Certificate (Autonomous Bodies) 165
GFR 12 - B Form of Utilization Certificate (For Loans) 167
GFR 12 - C Form of Utilization Certificate (State Governments)) 168
GFR 13 Statement of aggregate balance of loan(s) outstanding as on 169
31st March and details of defaults
GFR 14 Form of Security Bond (Fidelity Bond Deposited as Security) 170
GFR 15 Form of Written Undertaking to be executed by an Undertaking/ 172
Corporation wholly owned by the Central Government at the
time of sanctioning of a loan.
GFR 16 Certificate of transfer of charge 173
GFR 16 - A Joining Report 175
GFR 17 Fidelity Guarantee Policy 176
GFR 18 Accession Register 179
GFR 19 Notice to borrower about the due date for repayment of 180
loan and interest thereon
GFR 20 Register of Policy Holder 181
GFR 21 Register of Grants to be maintained by the sanctioning Authority. 182
GFR 22 Register of Fixed Assets 183
GFR 23 Stock Register of consumables such as Stationery, Chemicals, 184
Spare parts etc.
GFR 24 Register of Assets of Historical /Artistic value. 185
GFR 25 Government Guarantees. 186
GFR 26 Furnishing of data regarding Guarantees to Ministry of Finance. 187
CONCORDANCE TABLE 188
7
8
Chapter – 1
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
INTRODUCTION
Rule 1 Short Title and Commencement: These responsibility of controlling the
rules may be called General Financial Rules, incurring of expenditure and/or the
2017 and they shall come into force at once collection of revenue. The term shall
and shall be applicable to all Central include a Head of Department and
Government Ministries/Departments, also an Administrator;
attached and subordinate bodies. The
(xi) “Department of the Government of
provisions contained in GFRs are deemed to
India” means any of the Ministries,
be applicable to Autonomous Bodies except
Departments, Secretariats and Offices
to the extent the bye-laws of an Autonomous
as notified from time to time and listed
Body provides for separate Financial Rules
in the First Schedule to the
which have been approved by the
Government of India (Allocation of
Government.
Business Rules);
Rule 2 Definition : In these rules, unless the context
(xii) “Drawing and Disbursing Officer”
otherwise requires-
means a Head of Office and also any
(i) “Accounts Officer” means the other Gazetted Officer so designated
Head of an Office of Accounts or the by a Department of the Central
Head of a Pay and Accounts Government, a Head of Department
Office set up under the scheme of or an Administrator, to draw bills and
departmentalization of accounts; make payments on behalf of the
(ii) “Administrator ” means Central Government. The term shall
Administrator of a Union Territory, by also include a Head of Department or
whatever name designated; an Administrator where he himself
discharges such function;
(iii) “Appropriation” means the
assignment, to meet specified (xiii) “Ministry of Finance” means the
expenditure, of funds included in a Ministry of Finance of the Central
primary unit of appropriation; Government;
(iv) “Audit Officer” means the Head of (xiv) “Financial Year” means the year
an Office of Audit; beginning on the 1st of April and
ending on the 31st of March
(v) “Competent Authority” means, in
following;
respect of the power to be exercised
under any of these Rules, the President (xv) “Government” means the Central
or such other authority to which the Government;
power is delegated by or under these (xvi) “Government Account” means the
Rules, Delegation of Financial Power account relating to the Consolidated
Rules or any other general or special Fund, the Contingency Fund and the
orders issued by the Government of Public Account; as defined in these
India; rules;
(vi) “Comptroller and Auditor (xvii) “Head of the Department’ means
General” means the Comptroller an authority or person (not below the
and Auditor General of India; rank of a Deputy Secretary to the
(vii) “Consolidated Fund” means the Government of India), declared by the
Consolidated Fund of India referred concerned Department in the
to in Article 266 (1) of the Government of India as a Head of
Constitution; Department in relation to an
identifiable establishment or
(viii) “Constitution” means the
establishments to exercise the
Constitution of India;
delegated financial powers under
(ix) “Contingency Fund” means the
these Rules;
Contingency Fund of India
(xviii) “Head of Office” means (a) a
established under the Contingency
Gazetted Officer declared as such in
Fund of India Act, 1950, in terms of
the Delegation of Financial Powers
Article 267 (1) of the Constitution;
Rules and (b) any other authority
(x) “Controlling Officer” means an
declared as such under any general or
officer entrusted by a Department of
special orders of the competent
the Central Government with the
9
Chapter – 1
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
authority; (xxxi) CAPEX model: In the CAPEX Model,
(xix) “Local Body” means an authority Capital expenditures is used by the
legally entitled or specially buyer to straightway purchase goods
empowered by Government to followed by procurement of
administer a local fund; consumables, arranging
comprehensive maintenance contact
(xx) “Local Fund” means a local fund as
after warranty period and finally
defined in Rule 652 of the Treasury
disposing the product after useful life;
Rules;
(xxxii)OPEX model: In the OPEX model, the
(xxi) “Non-recurring expenditure”
Seller provides the goods, maintains it
means expenditure other than
and also provides the consumables as
recurring expenditure;
required and finally takes back the
(xxii) “President” means the President of
goods after useful / contracted life.
India;
The expenditure is made by the Buyer
(xxiii) “Primary unit of appropriation” in a staggered manner as per the
means a primary unit of terms and conditions of the contract.
appropriation referred to in Rule 8 of
Rule 3 Interdepartmental consultations: When
the Delegation of Financial Powers
the subject of a case concerns more than one
Rules;
Department, no order shall be issued until all
(xxiv) “Public Account” means the Public such Departments have concurred, or, failing
Account of India referred to in Article such concurrence, a decision has been taken
266 (2) of the Constitution; by or under the authority of the Cabinet. In
(xxv) “Public Works” means civil/ this regard it is clarified that every case in
electrical works including public which a decision, if taken in one Department,
buildings, public services, transport is likely to affect the transaction of business
infrastructure etc., both original and allotted to another Department, shall also be
repair works and any other project, deemed to be a case which concerns more
including infrastructure which is for than one Department.
the use of general public; Rule 4 Departmental Regulations of financial
(xxvi) “Re-appropriation” means the character: All Departmental regulations, in
transfer of funds from one primary so far as they embody orders or instructions
unit of appropriation to another such of a financial character or have important
unit; financial bearing, must invariably be made
(xxvii)“Recurring expenditure” means the by, or with the approval of the Ministry of
expenditure which is incurred at Finance.
periodical intervals for the same Rule 5 Removal of Doubts: Where a doubt arises
purpose. Expenditures other than as to the interpretation of any of the
recurring expenditure are non- provisions of these Rules, the matter shall be
recurring expenditure; referred to the Ministry of Finance for
(xxviii)“Reserve Bank” means the Reserve decision.
Bank of India or any office or agency Rule 6 Modifications:
of the Reserve Bank of India and (1) The systems and procedures
includes any Bank acting as the agent established by these Rules are subject
of the Reserve Bank of India in to general or special instructions/
accordance with the provisions of the orders, which the Ministry of Finance
Reserve Bank of India Act, 1934 (Act II may issue from time to time.
of 1934);
(2) The systems and procedures
(xxix) “Subordinate authority” means a established by these Rules may be
Department of the Central modified by any other authority only
Government or any authority with the express approval of the
subordinate to the President; Ministry of Finance.
(xxx) “Treasury Rules” means the Treasury
Rules of the Central Government;
10
Chapter – 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GENERAL SYSTEM OF FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT
Rule 7 All moneys received by or on behalf of the receipts shall be laid down in the regulations
Government either as dues of Government or of the Department responsible for the same
for deposit, remittance or otherwise, shall be Rule 11 (2) In Departments in which officers are
brought into Government Account without required to receive moneys on behalf of
delay, in accordance with such general or Government and issue receipts therefor in
special rules as may be issued under Articles Form GAR-6 the departmental regulations
150 and 283 (1) of the Constitution. should provide for the maintenance of a
Rule 8 (1) proper account of the receipt and issue of the
(I) Under Article 284 of the Constitution all receipt books, the number of receipt books to
moneys received by or deposited with be issued at a time to each officer and a check
any officer employed in connection with with the officer’s accounts of the used books
the affairs of the Union in his capacity as when returned.
such, other than revenues or public Rule 12 Amounts due to Government shall not be left
moneys raised or received by outstanding without sufficient reasons.
Government, shall be paid into the Where such amounts appear to be
Public Account. irrecoverable, the orders of the competent
(ii) All moneys received by or deposited with authority shall be obtained for their
the Supreme Court of India or with any adjustment.
other Court, other than a High Court, Rule 13 Unless specially authorized by any rule or
within a Union Territory, shall also be order made by competent authority, no sums
dealt with in accordance with Clause (i) shall be credited as revenue by debit to a
of sub-rule (1). suspense head. The credit must follow and
Rule 8 (2) The Head of Account to which such not precede actual realization.
moneys shall be credited and the withdrawal Rule 14 Subject to any general or special orders
of moneys therefrom shall be governed by the issued by a Department of the Central
relevant provisions of Government Government, an Administrator or a Head of a
Accounting Rules 1990 and the Central Department responsible for the collection of
Government Account (Receipts and revenue shall keep the Finance Ministry fully
Payments) Rules, 1983 or such other general informed of the progress of collection of
or special orders as may be issued in this revenue under his control and of all
behalf. important variations in such collections as
Rule 9 It is the duty of the Department of the Central compared with the Budget Estimates.
Government concerned to ensure that the Rule 15 (1) Rents of buildings and lands. When
receipts and dues of the Government are the maintenance of any rentable building is
correctly and promptly assessed, collected entrusted to a civil department, other than the
and duly credited to the Consolidated Fund Central Public Works Department, the
or Public Account as the case may be. Administrator or the Head of the Department
Rule 10 The Controlling Officer shall arrange to concerned shall be responsible for the due
obtain from his subordinate officers monthly recovery of the rent thereof.
accounts and returns in suitable form Rule 15 (2) The procedure for the assessment and
claiming credit for the amounts paid into the recovery of rent of any building hired out will
treasury or bank as the case may be, or be regulated generally by the rules applicable
otherwise accounted for, and compare them to buildings under the direct charge of the
with the statements of credits furnished by the Central Public Works Department.
Accounts Officer to see that the amounts Rule 15 (3) The detailed rules and procedure,
reported as collected have been duly regarding the demand and recovery of rent of
credited. Accordingly, each Accounts Officer Government buildings and lands, are
will send an extract from his accounts contained in the departmental regulations of
showing the amounts brought to credit in the the departments in charge of those buildings.
accounts in each month to the Controlling
Rule 16 (1) Fines . Every authority having the power
Officer concerned.
to impose and/ or realize a fine shall ensure
Rule 11 (1) Detailed rules and procedure regarding that the money is realized, duly checked and
assessment, collection, allocation, remission deposited into a treasury or bank as the case
and abandonment of revenue and other may be.
11
Chapter – 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Rule 16 (2) Every authority having the power to officer should also enforce financial order
refund fines shall ensure that the refunds are and strict economy and see that all relevant
checked and no double refunds of amounts financial rules and regulations are observed,
of fines collected or refunds of fines not by his own office and by subordinate
actually paid into a treasury or bank as the disbursing officers. Among the principles on
case may be, are made which emphasis is generally laid are the
Rule 17 Miscellaneous Demands. Accounts following :-
Officers shall watch the realization of (i) Every officer is expected to exercise the
miscellaneous demands of Government, not same vigilance in respect of
falling under the ordinary revenue expenditure incurred from public
administration, such as contributions from moneys as a person of ordinary
State Governments, Local Funds, contractors prudence would exercise in respect of
and others towards establishment charges. expenditure of his own money.
Rule 18 Remission of Revenue. A claim to revenue (ii) The expenditure should not be prima
shall not be remitted or abandoned save with facie more than the occasion
the sanction of the competent authority. demands.
Rule 19 (1) Subject to any general or special orders (iii) No authority should exercise its
issued by the Government Departments of powers of sanctioning expenditure to
the Central Government, Administrators and pass an order which will be directly or
Heads of Departments, other than those in indirectly to its own advantage.
the Department of Posts, shall submit
(iv) Expenditure from public moneys
annually on the 1st of June to the Audit
should not be incurred for the benefit
Officer and the Accounts Officer concerned,
of a particular person or a section of
statements showing the remissions of
the people, unless –
revenue and abandonment of claims to
(a)a claim for the amount could be
revenue sanctioned during the preceding
enforced in a Court of Law, or
year by competent authorities in exercise of
(b)the expenditure is in pursuance of
the discretionary powers vested in them
a recognized policy or custom.
otherwise than by law or rule having the force
of law, provided that individual remissions Rule 22 Expenditure from Public Funds. No
below Rupees one thousand need not be authority may incur any expenditure or enter
included in the statements. into any liability involving expenditure or
transfer of moneys for investment or deposit
Rule 19 (2) For inclusion in the statements referred to
from public funds (Consolidated Fund /
in Rule 19 (1) above, remissions and
Contingency Fund and the Public Accounts)
abandonments should be classified broadly
unless the same has been sanctioned by a
with reference to the grounds on which they
competent authority
were sanctioned and a total figure should be
given for each class. A brief explanation of Rule 23 Delegation of Financial Powers. The
the circumstances leading to the remission financial powers of the Government have
should be added in the case of each class. been delegated to various subordinate
authorities vide Delegation of Financial
Rule 20 Departments of the Central Government and
Powers Rules as amended from time to time.
Administrators may make rules defining
The financial powers of the Government,
remissions and abandonments of revenue
which have not been delegated to a
for the purpose of Rule 19 above.
subordinate authority, shall vest in the
Finance Ministry.
I. GENERAL PRINCIPLES RELATING TO
Rule 24 Consultation with Financial Advisers. All
EXPENDITURE AND PAYMENT OF
draft memoranda for Expenditure Finance
MONEY
Committee or Public Investment Bureau or
Committee on Establishment Expenditure
Rule 21 Standards of financial propriety. Every and Cabinet Committee for Economic Affairs
officer incurring or authorizing expenditure or Cabinet shall be circulated by the Ministry
from public moneys should be guided by or Department concerned after consultation
high standards of financial propriety. Every with the concerned Financial Adviser of the
12
Chapter – 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Ministry or Department. A confirmation to the President, a subordinate authority shall
this effect shall be included in the draft not, without the previous consent of the
memorandum at the circulation stage. Finance Ministry, issue an order which -
Rule 25 (1) Provision of funds for sanction. All (i) involves any grant of land, or
sanctions to the expenditure shall indicate the assignment of revenue, or concession,
details of the provisions in the relevant grant grant, lease or licence of mineral or
or appropriation wherefrom such forest rights, or rights to water, power
expenditure is to be met. or any easement or privilege of such
Rule 25 (2) All proposals for sanction to expenditure, concessions, or
shall indicate whether such expenditure can (ii) involves relinquishment of revenue in
be met by valid appropriation or re- any way
appropriation. Rule 29 Procedure for communication of
Rule 25 (3) In cases where it becomes necessary to sanctions. All financial sanctions and orders
issue a sanction to expenditure before funds issued by a competent authority shall be
are communicated, the sanction should communicated to the Audit Officer and the
specify that such expenditure is subjected to Accounts Officer. The procedure to be
funds being communicated in the budget of followed for communication of financial
the year. sanctions and orders will be as under :-
Rule 26 Responsibility of Controlling Officer in (i) All financial sanctions issued by a
respect of Budget allocation. The duties Department of the Central
and responsibilities of a controlling officer in Government which relate to a matter
respect of funds placed at his disposal are to concerning the Department proper
ensure : and on the basis of which payment is
(i) that the expenditure does not exceed to be made or authorized by the
the budget allocation. Accounts Officer, should be addressed
to him.
(ii) that the expenditure is incurred for the
purpose for which funds have been (ii) All other sanctions should be accorded
provided. in the form of an Order, which need
not be addressed to any authority, but
(iii) that the expenditure is incurred in
a copy thereof should be endorsed to
public interest.
the Accounts Officer concerned.
(iv) that adequate control mechanism is
(iii) In the case of non-recurring
functioning in his Department for
contingent and miscellaneous
prevention, detection of errors and
expenditure, the sanctioning authority
irregularities in the financial
may, where required, accord sanction
proceedings of his subordinate offices
by signing or countersigning the bill or
and to guard against waste and loss
voucher, whether before or after the
of public money,
money is drawn, instead of by a
Rule 27 (1) Date of effect of sanction. Subject to
separate sanction.
fulfilment of the provisions as contained in
(iv) All financial sanctions and orders
the Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, all
issued by a Department of the Central
rules, sanctions or orders shall come into
Government with the concurrence of
force from the date of issue unless any other
the Internal Finance Wing or Finance
date from which they shall come into force is
Ministry, as applicable, should be
specified therein.
communicated to the Accounts Officer
Rule 27 (2) Date of creation to be indicated in
in accordance with the procedure laid
sanctions for temporary posts. Orders
down in the Delegation of Financial
sanctioning the creation of a temporary post
Powers Rules, and orders issued
should, in addition to the sanctioned
thereunder from time to time.
duration, invariably specify the date from
(v) All financial sanctions and orders
which it is to be created
issued by a Department with the
Rule 28 Powers in regard to certain special matters.—
concurrence of the Ministry of Home
Except in pursuance of the general
Affairs or Comptroller and Auditor
delegation made by, or with the approval of
General of India or Department of
13
Chapter – 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Personnel should specify that the concurrence of the Comptroller and
sanction or orders are issued with the Auditor General of India shall be
concurrence of that Department supplied to the Comptroller and
along with the number and date of Auditor General of India.
relevant communication of that (xi) Copies of all sanctions or orders other
Department wherein the concurrence than the following types should be
was conveyed. endorsed to the Audit Officers:-
(vi) All orders conveying sanctions to (a)Sanctions relating to grant to
expenditure of a definite amount or advances to Central Government
upto a specific limit should express employees.
both in words and figures the amount
(b)Sanctions relating to appointment
of expenditure sanctioned.
or promotion or transfer of
(vii) Sanctions accorded by a Head of Gazetted and non-Gazetted
Department may be communicated to Officers.
the Accounts Officer by an authorized
(c) All sanctions relating to creation or
Gazetted Officer of his Office duly
continuation or abolition of posts.
signed by him for the Head of
(d)Sanctions for handing over charge
Department or conveyed in the name
and taking over charge, etc.
of the Head of the Department.
(e)Sanctions relating to payment or
(viii) All orders conveying sanctions to the
withdrawal of General Provident
grant of additions to pay such as
Fund advances to Government
Special Allowance, Personal Pay, etc.,
servants.
should contain a brief summary of the
reasons for the grant of such (f) Sanctions of contingent
additions to pay so as to enable the expenditure incurred under the
Accounts Officer to see that it is powers of Head of Offices.
correctly termed as Special (g)Other sanctions of routine nature
Allowance, Personal Pay, etc., as the issued by Heads of Subordinate
case may be. Officers (other than those issued by
(ix) Orders issued by a Department of a Ministries or Departments proper
Union Territory Government where and under powers of a Head of
Audit and Accounts (a) have not been Department).
separated shall be communicated (xii) Sanctions accorded by competent
direct to the Audit authority; (b) have authority to grants of land and
been separated, copies shall be alienation of land revenue, other than
endorsed to the Audit authorities. those in which assignments of land
In case of sanctions in respect of revenue are treated as cash payment,
matters, where reference was made to shall be communicated to the Audit
the Central Government under the and/ or the Accounts Officer, as the
Rules of Business framed under case may be, in a consolidated
Section 46 of the Government of monthly return giving the necessary
Union Territory Act, 1963, the details.
following clause shall be added in the Rule 30 Lapse of Sanctions. A sanction for any fresh
sanction endorsed to Audit:- charge shall, unless it is specifically renewed,
“A reference had been made in this lapse if no payment in whole or in part has
case to the Central Government and been made during a period of twelve months
the above order/letter conforms to the from the date of issue of such sanction.
decision of the Central Government Provided that -
vide Government of India, (i) when the period of currency of the
Ministry/Department of...........Letter sanction is prescribed in the
No…………dated…………..”. departmental regulations or is
(x) Copies of all General Financial specified in the sanction itself, it shall
Orders issued by a Department of the lapse on the expiry of such periods; or
Central Government with the (ii) when there is a specific provision in a
14
Chapter – 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
sanction that the expenditure would (b)under assessments which are due
be met from the Budget provision of a to interpretation of the law by the
specified financial year, it shall lapse local authority being overruled by
at the close of that financial year; or higher authority after the expiry of
(iii) in the case of purchase of stores, a the time-limit prescribed under the
sanction shall not lapse, if tenders law, and
have been accepted (in the case of (c) refunds allowed on the ground that
local or direct purchase of stores) or the claims were time-barred:
the indent has been placed (in the (ii) Petty losses of value not exceeding
case of Central Purchases) on the Rupees ten thousand.
Central Purchase Organization within
Rule 33 (2) Cases involving serious irregularities shall
the period of one year of the date of
be brought to the notice of Financial Adviser
issue of that sanction, even if the
or Chief Accounting Authority of the Ministry
actual payment in whole or in part has
or Department concerned and the Controller
not been made during the said
General of Accounts, Ministry of Finance.
period.
Rule 33 (3) Report of loss contemplated in sub-rule
Rule 31 Notwithstanding anything contained in
(1) & (2) shall be made at two stages.—
Rule 30, a sanction in respect of an addition
(i) An initial report should be made as
to a permanent establishment, made from
soon as a suspicion arises that a loss
year to year under a general scheme by a
has taken place.
competent authority, or in respect of an
allowance sanctioned for a post or for a class (ii) The final report should be sent to
of Government servants, but not drawn by authorities indicated in sub rule (1) &
the officer(s) concerned, shall not lapse. (2) after investigation indicating
nature and extent of loss, errors or
Rule 32 Remission of disallowances by Audit and
neglect of rules by which the loss has
writing off of overpayment made to
been caused and the prospects of
Government servants. The remission of
recovery.
disallowances by Audit and writing off of
overpayments made to Government servants Rule 33 (4) The complete report contemplated in sub-
by competent authorities shall be in rule 3, shall reach through proper channels
accordance with the provisions of the to the Head of the Department, who shall
Delegation of Financial Powers Rules, and finally dispose of the same under the powers
instructions issued thereunder. delegated to him under the Delegation of
Financial Power Rules. The reports, which he
cannot finally dispose of under the delegated
II. DEFALCATION AND LOSSES
powers, shall be submitted to the Finance
Ministry.
Rule 33 (1) Report of Losses. Any loss or shortage of Rule 33 (5) An amount lost through
public moneys, departmental revenue or misappropriation, defalcation,
receipts, stamps, opium, stores or other embezzlement, etc., may be redrawn on a
property held by, or on behalf of, simple receipt pending investigation,
Government irrespective of the cause of loss recovery or write-off with the approval of the
and manner of detection, shall be authority competent to write-off the loss in
immediately reported by the subordinate question.
authority concerned to the next higher
Rule 33 (6) In cases of loss to Government on account
authority as well as to the Statutory Audit
of culpability of Government servants, the
Officer and to the concerned Principal
loss should be borne by the Central
Accounts Officer, even when such loss has
Government Department or State
been made good by the party responsible for
Government concerned with the transaction.
it. However the following losses need not be
Similarly, if any recoveries are made from the
reported:
erring Government officials in cash, the
(i) Cases involving losses of revenue due to receipt will be credited to the Central
(a)mistakes in assessments which are Government Department or the State
discovered too late to permit a Government who sustained the loss.
supplementary claim being made, Rule 33 (7) All cases involving loss of Government
15
Chapter – 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
money arising from erroneous or irregular assessment of responsibility for the loss shall
issue of cheques or irregular accounting of be conducted according to the instructions
receipts will be reported to the Controller contained in Appendix 1 and those issued by
General of Accounts along with the the Ministry of Personnel from time to time.
circumstances leading to the loss, so that he Rule 38 Prompt disposal of cases of loss. Action at
can take steps to remedy defects in rules or each stage of detection, reporting, write off,
procedures, if any, connected therewith. final disposal, in cases of losses including
Rule 34 Loss of Government Property due to fire, action against delinquents and remedial
theft, fraud. Departmental Officers shall, in measures should be completed promptly with
addition to taking action as prescribed in special attention to action against
Rule 33, follow the provisions indicated delinquents and remedial measures, taken to
below in cases involving material loss or strengthen the control system
destruction of Government property as a
result of fire, theft, fraud, etc.
III. SUBMISSION OF RECORDS AND
All losses above the value of Rupees Fifty INFORMATION
thousand due to suspected fire, theft, fraud,
etc., shall be invariably reported to the Police
Rule 39 Demand for information by Audit or
for investigation as early as possible.
Accounts Officer. A subordinate authority
Once the matter is reported to the Police
shall afford all reasonable facilities to the
Authorities, all concerned should assist the
Audit Officer and Pay and Accounts Officer
Police in their investigation. A formal
for the discharge of his functions, and furnish
investigation report should be obtained from
fullest possible information required by him
the Police Authorities in all cases, which are
for the preparation of any official account or
referred to them.
report, payments and internal audit.
Rule 35 Loss of immovable property by fire, flood
Rule 40 A subordinate authority shall not withhold
etc. All loss of immovable property
any information, books or other documents
exceeding Rupees fifty thousand , such as
required by the Audit Officer or Accounts
buildings, communications, or other works,
Officer.
caused by fire, flood, cyclone, earthquake or
Rule 41 If the contents of any file are categorized as
any other natural cause, shall be reported at
‘Secret’ or ‘Top Secret’ the file maybe sent
once by the subordinate authority concerned
personally to the Head of the Audit Office
to Government through the usual channel.
specifying this fact, who will then deal with it
All other losses should be immediately
in accordance with the standing instructions
brought to the notice of the next higher
for handling and custody of such classified
authority.
documents.
Rule 36 Report to Audit and Accounts Officers.
After a full enquiry as to the cause and the
extent of the loss has been made, the detailed
report should be sent by the subordinate
authority concerned to Government through
the proper channel; a copy of the report or an
abstract thereof being simultaneously
forwarded to the Audit officer and Pay and
Accounts Officer
Rule 37 Responsibility of losses. An officer shall be
held personally responsible for any loss
sustained by the Government through fraud
or negligence on his part. He will also be held
personally responsible for any loss arising
from fraud or negligence of any other officer
to the extent to which it may be shown that he
contributed to the loss by his own action or
negligence.
The departmental proceedings for
16
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
BUDGET FORMULATION AND IMPLEMENTATION
Rule 42 Financial Year. Financial year of the wise classification, it may be ensured that
Government shall commence on the 1st day item wise break-up of all major items of tax
of April of each year and end on the 31st day and non-tax revenues are clearly identified
of March of the following year. and depicted in the receipt estimates. This is
Rule 43 (1)Presentation of Budget to Parliament. required to highlight all individual items of
In accordance with the provisions of Article significance. Any major variation in estimates
112 (1) of the Constitution, the Finance with reference to past actuals or/and Budget
Minister shall arrange to lay before both the Estimates shall be supported by cogent
Houses of Parliament, an Annual Financial reasons. The accounting heads under which
Statement also known as the ‘Budget’ major tax and non-tax revenues are collected
showing the estimated receipts and shall be prescribed by the administrative
expenditure of the Central Government in Ministry in consultation with the Budget
respect of a financial year, before the Division in the Finance Ministry.
commencement of that year. Rule 46 Non-Tax Revenues. While the tax revenues,
Rule 43 (2) The receipts and expenditure of the non-debt capital receipts including
Railways being a departmental commercial disinvestments and borrowings are managed
organization form part of the Government’s by the various Departments of the Ministry of
receipts and expenditure and are included in Finance, the non-tax revenues are collected
the Annual Financial Statement. With the through all Ministries/Departments and other
merger of Railway Budget with the General autonomous bodies and implementing
Budget, the Demands for Grants and the agencies and comprise an important source
Statement of Budget Estimates of Railways of revenue for the Government.
shall also be part of the General Budget with Rule 47 User Charges. ‘User Charges’ is an
effect from 2017-18. important component of the non-tax
Rule 43 (3) The provisions for preparation, revenues. Each Ministry/Department may
formulation and submission of budget to the undertake an exercise to identify the ‘user
Parliament are contained in Articles 112 to charges’ levied by it and publish the same on
116 of the Constitution of India. its website.
Rule 43 (4) The Ministry of Finance, Budget Division, (i) While fixing the rates of user charges,
shall issue guidelines for preparation of the Ministries/Departments must
budget estimates from time to time. All the ensure that the user charges recover
Ministries/Departments shall comply in full the current cost of providing services
with these guidelines. with reasonable return on capital
investment.
Rule 44 The budget shall contain the following :-
(ii) Any deviation from these principles
(i) Estimates of all revenues expected to
shall be specifically recorded with
be raised during the financial year to
reasons justifying the setting of user
which the budget relates ;
charges lower than the cost recovery
(ii) Estimates of all expenditure for each
norms, if any.
programme, scheme and project in
(iii) The rates of user charges should be
that financial year;
linked with appropriate price indices
(iii) Estimates of all interest and debt
and reviewed at least every three
servicing charges and any repayments
years.
on loans in that financial year;
(iv) In order to enable ease of revision of
(iv) Any other information as may be
user charges, the rate of user charges
prescribed.
shall be fixed, whereever possible
Rule 45 Receipt Estimates. The detailed estimates of through Rules or executive orders and
receipts shall be prepared by the estimating not through a statute.
authorities separately for each Major Head
Rule 48 Dividends and Profits. Dividends and
of Account in the prescribed form. For each
profits including the transfer of surplus from
Major Head, the estimating authority shall
Reserve Bank of India is a major component
give the break-up of the Minor/Subhead/
of the non-tax revenues. The payment of
Detailed wise estimate along with actuals of
dividends/profits etc. by the Central Public
the past three years. While doing the head
Sector Enterprises shall not be delayed and
17
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
must be paid within an appropriate time expenditure for which vote of Lok Sabha is
frame immediately after the decision on required shall be in the form of Demand for
dividend is taken in the AGM. Ministries or Grants.
Departments shall monitor timely payments Rule 51 (2) Generally, one Demand for Grant is
of dividends and profits. The dividend shall presented in respect of each Ministry or
be payable as per the guidelines issued by Department. However, in respect of large
DIPAM in this regards. Ministries or Departments, more than one
Rule 49 Receipts Portal. The Government has Demand may be presented. Each Demand
provided a public portal for online collection normally includes provisions required for a
of various non-tax revenues including service, i.e. provisions on account of revenue
various fees and user charges through e- expenditure, capital expenditure, grants to
Receipts. All Ministries/Departments,shall the State and Union Territory Governments
take prompt measures for migration to e- and also Loans and Advances relating to the
Receipts, to ensure customer convenience service.
and immediate credit of receipts to the Rule 51 (3) The Demand for Grants shall be
Government account. presented to Parliament at two levels. The
Rule 50 (1) Expenditure estimates. The main Demand for Grants shall be presented
expenditure estimates shall show separately to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance,
the sums required to meet the expenditure Budget Division along with the Annual
Charged on the Consolidated Fund under Financial Statement while the Detailed
Article 112 (3) of the Constitution and sums Demands for Grants, for consideration by the
required to meet other expenditure for which “Departmentally Related Standing
a vote of the Lok Sabha is required under Committee” (DRSC) of the Parliament, are
Article 113(2) of the Constitution. laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha by the
Rule 50 (2) The estimates shall also distinguish concerned Ministries/ Departments, as per
provisions for expenditure on revenue dates approved from time to time.
account from capital account, including on Rule 52 (1) Form of Annual Financial Statement
loans by the Government and for repayment and Demands for Grant. The form of the
of loans, treasury bills, cash management Annual Financial Statement and Demands
bills and ways and means advances. for Grants shall be laid down by the Finance
Rule 50 (3) The detailed estimates of expenditure Ministry and no alteration of arrangement or
shall be prepared by the estimating classification shall be made without the
authorities up to the final unit of approval of that Ministry.
appropriation (Object head) under the Rule 52 (2) The heads under which provision for
prescribed Major and Minor Heads of expenditure shall be made in the Demands
Accounts for both Revenue and Capital for Grants or Appropriation shall be
expenditure. Estimates shall include suitable prescribed by the Finance Ministry in
provision for liabilities of the previous years consultation with the Administrative Ministry
that is to be discharged during the year. or Department. The authorized heads for
Rule 50 (4) The estimates of scheme related and expenditure in a year shall be as shown in the
other expenditures shall be processed in Detailed Demands for Grants passed by
consultation with the Budget Division, Parliament and no change shall be made
Ministry of Finance in accordance with the therein without the formal approval of the
instructions issued by it. Finance Ministry.
Rule 50 (5) The Revised and Budget Estimates of both Rule 52 (3) The major head wise provisions in the
Revenue and Capital expenditure after being Detailed Demands for Grants shall match
scrutinized by the Financial Advisers and with the provision made in the Demands for
approved by the Secretary of the Grants presented by Budget Division, as the
Administrative Ministry or Department appropriations are sought on the basis of
concerned shall be forwarded to the Budget Demands for Grants.
Division in the Ministry of Finance in such NOTE: Detailed instructions for preparation
manner and forms as may be prescribed by it of the budget are available in Appendix 2, 3
from time to time. and 4.
Rule 51 (1) Demands for Grants. The estimates for Rule 53 (1) Acceptance and inclusion of
18
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
estimates. The estimates of receipts and Rule 56 Communication and distribution of
expenditure of each Ministry/Department grants and appropriations. After the
shall be scrutinized in the Budget Division of Appropriation Bill relating to Budget is
the Ministry of Finance. Secretary passed, the Ministry of Finance shall
(Expenditure) may hold meetings with communicate the same to the Ministries /
Secretaries or Financial Advisers of Departments which, in turn, shall distribute
Administrative Ministries or Departments to the same to their subordinate formations. The
discuss the totality of the requirements of distribution so made shall also be
funds for various programmes and schemes, communicated to the respective Pay and
along with receipts of the Ministries or Accounts Officers who shall exercise check
Departments. against the allocation to each subordinate
Rule 53 (2) The estimates initially submitted by the authority.
Departments may undergo some changes as
a result of scrutiny in the Budget Division, II. CONTROL OF EXPENDITURE AGAINST
Ministry of Finance and deliberations in the BUDGET
pre-budget meetings between the Secretary
(Expenditure) and the Secretary or Financial
Rule 57 (1) Responsibility for control of
Adviser of the Department concerned. The
Expenditure. The Departments of the
final estimates arrived at on the basis of
Central Government shall be responsible for
scrutiny and pre-budget meetings shall be
the control of expenditure against the
incorporated in the Budget documents.
sanctioned grants and appropriations placed
Rule 54 Outcome Budget. After finalization of the
at their disposal. The control shall be
estimates for budgetary allocations, the
exercised through the Heads of Departments
Department of Expenditure in consultation
and other Controlling Officers, if any, and
with NITI Aayog and the concerned Ministries
Disbursing Officers subordinate to them.
shall prepare an Outcome Budget statement
Rule 57 (2) A Grant or Appropriation can be utilised
linking outlays against each scheme/project
only to cover the charges (including liabilities,
with the outputs/deliverables and medium
if any, of the past year) which are to be paid
term outcomes. The outputs/deliverables
during the financial year of the Grant or
shall be mandatorily given in
Appropriation and adjusted in the account of
measurable/quantitative terms on the basis
the year. No charges against a Grant or
of parameters and deliverables decided in
Appropriation can be authorized after the
advance, on the basis of projections made in
expiry of the financial year.
the Medium Term Expenditure Framework
(MTEF) Statement. Allocations for each Rule 57 (3) No expenditure shall be incurred which
scheme/project shall be against a firm set of may have the effect of exceeding the total
deliverables which shall be adhered to. The grant or appropriation authorized by
performance against specified outcomes Parliament by law for a financial year, except
would form the basis of deciding on the after obtaining a supplementary grant or
continuation of the scheme and the quantum appropriation or an advance from the
of budget allocation. Contingency Fund. Since voted and charged
portions as also the revenue and capital
Rule 55 Vote on Account. If the Appropriation Bill
sections of a Grant/Appropriation are distinct
seeking authorization of the Parliament to
and re-appropriation inter se is not
make expenditure in consonance with the
permissible, an excess in any one portion or
Budget proposal is likely to be passed after
section is treated as an excess in the
the start of the financial year to which it
Grant/Appropriation.
corresponds then pending the completion of
the procedure prescribed in Article 113 of the Rule 57 (4) To have effective control over expenditure
Constitution for the passing of the Budget, by the Departments, Controlling and
the Finance Ministry may need to obtain a Disbursing Officers subordinate to them shall
‘Vote on Account’ to cover expenditure for follow the procedure as given below :-
abrief period in accordance with the (i) For drawal of money the Drawing and
provisions of Article 116 of the Constitution. Disbursing Officer shall (a)
Funds made available under Vote on Prepare and present bills for
Account are not to be utilized for expenditure “charged” and “voted” expenditure
on a ‘New Service’.
19
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
separately. (b) Enter on each bill the Controlling Officer finds defects in
complete accounts classifications any of these respects, he shall take
from major head down to the object steps to rectify the defect.
head of account. When a single bill (vi) When all the returns from the
includes charges falling under two or Disbursing Officers for a particular
more object heads, the charges shall month have been received and found
be distributed accurately over the to be in order, the Controlling Officer
respective heads. (c) Enter on each bill shall compile a statement in Form
the progressive total of expenditure GFR 7, in which he shall incorporate -
up-to-date under the primary unit of (a) the totals of the figures supplied by
appropriation to which the bill relates, Disbursing Officers;
including the amount of the bill on
(b) the totals taken from his own
which the entry is made.
registers in Form GFR 5;
(ii) All drawing and disbursing officers
(c) the totals of such adjustments
shall maintain separate registers in
under the various detailed heads
Form GFR 5, physically or
as communicated to him by the
electronically for allocation under
Accounts Officer on account of
each minor or sub-head of account
transfer entries and expenditure
with which they are concerned.
debited to the grant as a result of
(iii) On the third day of each month, a settlement of inward account
copy of the entries made in this claims and not reckoned by his
register during the preceding month DDOs.
shall be sent by the officer
(vii). If any adjustment communicated by
maintaining it, to the Head of the
the Accounts Officer affects the
Department or other designated
appropriation at the disposal of a
Controlling Officer. This statement
subordinate Disbursing Officer, the
shall also include adjustment of an
fact that the adjustment has been
inward claim, etc., communicated by
made shall be communicated by the
Pay and Accounts Officer directly to
Controlling Officer to the Disbursing
the DDO (and not to his Grant
Officer concerned.
Controlling Officer). If there are no
(viii). On receipt of all the necessary returns,
entries in the register in any month, a
the Head of the Department shall
‘nil’ statement shall be sent.
prepare a consolidated account in
(iv) The Controlling Officer will maintain
Form GFR 8, showing the complete
a broadsheet in Form GFR 6 to
expenditure from the grant or
monitor the receipt of the return
appropriation at his disposal upto the
prescribed in the foregoing sub-
end of the preceding month.
clause
Rule 57 (5) The Head of the Department and the
(v). On receipt of the returns from
Accounts Officer shall be jointly responsible
Disbursing Officers, the Controlling
for the monthly reconciliation of the figures
Officer shall examine them and satisfy
given in the accounts maintained by the Head
himself :-
of the Department with those appearing in
(a) that the accounts classification the Accounts Officer’s books. The procedure
has been properly given; for reconciliation shall be as follows :-
(b) that progressive expenditure has (I). DDOs shall maintain a Bill Register in
been properly noted and the Form TR 28-A, and note all bills
available balances worked out presented for payment to the PAO in
correctly; the register. As soon as cheques for the
(c) that expenditure up-to-date is bills presented for payment are
within the grant or appropriation; received, and/or status of e-payments
and are verified from the reports available
(d) that the returns have been signed with DDO on PFMS portal these shall
by Disbursing Officers. Where the be noted in the appropriate column of
the Bill Register and the DDOs shall
20
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ensure that the amounts of cheques Principal Accounts Officers (or the
tally with the net amount of the bills PAO concerned) for reconciliation.
presented. In case any retrenchment The Head of the Department shall
is made by the PAO, a note of such furnish a quarterly certificate to the
retrenchments shall be kept against Principal Accounts Officer certifying
the bill in the remarks column in TR the correctness of the figures for the
28-A. quarter by the 15th of the second
(ii) The PAOs shall furnish to each of the following month after the end of
DDOs including Cheque –drawing quarters April-June, July-September,
DDOs, an extract from the October-December and January-
expenditure control register or from March.
the Compilation Sheet every month Rule 57 (6) The Departments of the Central
indicating the expenditure relating to Government shall obtain from their Heads of
grants controlled by him classified Departments and other offices under them
under the various major-minor the departmental figures of expenditure in
detailed head of accounts. The Form GFR 8 by the 15th of the month
statements for May to March shall also following the month to which the returns
contain Progressive Figures. relate. The figures relating to Revenue and
(iii). On receipt of these extracts from the Capital expenditure shall be separately
PAOs, the DDOs shall tally the figures shown in these returns. The information so
received, excluding book obtained shall be posted in register(s) kept for
adjustments, with the expenditure watching the flow of expenditure against the
worked out for the month in the GFR 5 sanctioned grant or appropriation.
register. Discrepancies, if any, Progressive totals of expenditure shall be
between the two sets of figures shall worked out for the purpose. If the
be promptly investigated by the DDO departmental figures obtained in Form
in consultation with the PAO. He shall GFR 8 and posted in the register(s), require
also note in the GFR 5 register correction in a subsequent month, Heads of
particulars of book adjustments Departments or other offices shall make such
advised by the PAO through the corrections by making plus or minus entries in
monthly statement. Thereafter, the the progressive totals. In case the Accounts
DDO shall furnish to the PAO a Office figures which subsequently become
certificate of agreement of the figures available are found to be higher than
as per his books with those indicated departmental figures, the former shall be
by the PAOs by the last day of the assumed to be the correct figures, as
month following the month of appropriation accounts are prepared on the
accounts. basis of the figures booked in the accounts.
(iv). The Principal Accounts Officer (or PAO Rule 57 (7) The Departments of Central Government
wherever payments, relating to a shall also obtain from the Heads of
grant are handled wholly by a PAO) of Departments and other authorities under
each Ministry, shall send a monthly them, statements showing the details of the
statement showing the expenditure physical progress of the schemes for which
vis-à-vis the Budget provision under they are responsible. This statement shall
the various heads of accounts, in the show the name of the scheme, the Budget
prescribed pro forma, to the Heads of provision for each scheme, the progressive
Departments responsible for overall expenditure on each scheme, the progress of
control of expenditure against grant the scheme in physical terms and the detailed
of the Ministry as a whole. The figures reasons for any shortfalls or excess, both
so communicated by the Principal against physical and financial targets.
Accounts Officer (or the PAO Rule 57 (8) A Broadsheet in Form GFR 9 shall be
concerned) shall be compared by the maintained by the Departments of Central
Heads of Departments with those Government or each Head of Department
consolidated in Form GFR 8 and and other authorities directly under them, to
differences, if any, shall be taken up watch the prompt receipt of the various
by the Heads of Departments with the returns mentioned above from month to
21
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
month and to take necessary measures for financial year, all the anticipated savings
rectifying any defaults noticed. noticed in the Grants or Appropriations
Rule 58 Maintenance of Liability Register for controlled by them. The Finance Ministry shall
effecting proper control over communicate the acceptance of such
expenditure. In order to maintain proper surrenders as are accepted by it to the
control over expenditure, a Controlling Accounts Officer, before the close of the year.
Officer shall obtain from the spending The funds provided during the financial year
authorities liability statements in Form GFR 3- and not utilized before the close of that
A every month, starting from the month of financial year shall stand lapsed at the close
October in each financial year. The of the financial year.
Controlling Officer shall also maintain a Rule 62 (2) The savings as well as provisions that
Liability Register in Form GFR 3. cannot be profitably utilised shall be
Rule 59 Personal attention of the Head of surrendered to Government immediately
Department /Controlling Officer they are foreseen without waiting till the end
required to estimate savings or excesses. of the year. No savings shall be held in
A Head of Department or Controlling Officer reserve for possible future excesses.
shall be in a position to estimate the Rule 62 (3) Rush of expenditure, particularly in the
likelihood of savings or excesses every month closing months of the Financial year, shall be
and to regularize them in accordance with regarded as a breach of financial propriety
the instructions laid down in Rule 62. and shall be avoided. The Financial Advisers
Rule 60 Control of expenditure against of the Ministries/Departments shall ensure
grant/appropriation and ultimate adherence to the stipulated Monthly
responsibility of the authority Expenditure Plan and the guidelines issued in
administering it. The Accounts Officer this regard by the Budget Division,
shall report to the Head of the Department Department of Economic Affairs, from time to
concerned immediately on the first time.
appearance of any disproportionate Rule 62 (4) The Financial Advisers of the Ministries/
expenditure, particularly in respect of Departments shall ensure adherence to the
recurring items of expenditure under any stipulated Quarterly Expenditure Plan and the
grant or appropriation or a primary unit of guidelines issued in this regard by Ministry of
appropriation thereof. However, the Finance from time to time.
authority administering a grant/ Rule 63 Expenditure on New Service. No
appropriation is ultimately responsible for expenditure shall be incurred during a
the control of expenditure against the financial year on a “New Service” not
grant/appropriation and not the Accounts contemplated in the Annual Budget for the
Officer. year except after obtaining a supplementary
Rule 61 Excess Expenditure. grant or appropriation or an advance from
1. The Accounts Officer shall not allow the Contingency Fund during that year. The
any payment against sanctions in guidelines to determine cases of “New
excess of the Budget provisions unless Service”/”New Instrument of Service” are
there is specific approval of the Chief contained in Annexure-1 to Appendix -3.
Accounting Authority. Rule 64 (1) Additional Allotment for excess
2. The Financial Advisers and Chief expenditure. A subordinate authority
Accounting Authority, before incurring the expenditure shall be responsible
according concurrence for excess for seeing that the allotment placed at its
under any Head, shall ensure disposal is not exceeded. Where any excess
availability of funds through over the allotment is apprehended, the
Reappropriation/ Supplementary subordinate authority shall obtain additional
D e m a n d s f o r G r a n t s . allotment before incurring the excess
(Refer Appendix 10) expenditure. For this purpose, the authorities
incurring expenditure shall maintain a
Rule 62 (1) Surrender of savings. Departments of
‘Liability Register’ in Form GFR 3.
the Central Government shall surrender to
the Finance Ministry, by the dates prescribed Rule 64 (2) A Disbursing Officer may not, on his own
by that Ministry before the close of the authority, authorize any payment in excess of
22
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
the funds placed at his disposal. If the Instrument of Service” not provided in the
Disbursing Officer is called upon to honour a budget, necessary Supplementary Grant or
claim, which is certain to produce an excess Appropriation in accordance with Article 115
over the allotment or appropriation at his (1) of the Constitution shall be obtained
disposal, he shall take the orders of the before payment is authorized (Refer to
administrative authority to which he is Appendix 5).
subordinate before authorizing payment of Rule 67 (1) Advance from Contingency Fund.
the claim in question. The administrative When a need arises to incur unforeseen
authority shall then arrange to provide funds expenditure in excess of the sanctioned grant
either by reappropriation or by obtaining a or appropriation or on a new service not
Supplementary Grant or Appropriation or an provided in Budget and there is not sufficient
advance from the Contingency Fund. time for the voting of the Supplementary
Instructions contained in Note below Demand and the passing of the connected
Appendix 10 may also be kept in view. appropriation bill before close of the
Rule 65 (1) Re-appropriation of Funds. Subject to financial year, an advance from the
the provisions of Rule 10 of the Delegation of Contingency Fund set up under Article 267
Financial Powers Rules, and also subject to (1) of the Constitution shall be obtained
such other general or specific restrictions as before incurring the expenditure.
may be imposed by the Finance Ministry in Rule 67 (2) An advance from the Contingency Fund
this behalf, re-appropriation of funds from shall also be obtained to meet expenditure in
one primary unit of appropriation to another excess of the provisions for the service
such unit within a grant or appropriation, included in an Appropriation (Vote on
may be sanctioned by a competent authority Account) Act.
at any time before the close of the financial
Rule 67 (3) The application for an advance from the
year to which such grant or appropriation
Contingency Fund shall indicate inter alia the
relates. The Primary unit in this regard shall
particulars of the additional expenditure
be the final unit of appropriation i.e. the
involved and the sanction to the advance has
Object head of account.
also to indicate the sub-head and the primary
Rule 65 (2) Re-appropriation of funds shall be made unit of the Grant to which the expenditure
only when it is known or anticipated that the appropriately relates. In case, however, any
appropriation for the unit from which funds difficulty is felt, the matter shall be referred to
are to be transferred shall not be utilized in the Finance Ministry for clarification.
full or that savings can be effected in the
Rule 67 (4) The procedure for obtaining an advance
appropriation for the said unit.
from the Contingency Fund and recoupment
Rule 65 (3) Funds shall not be re-appropriated from of the Fund shall be as laid down in the
a unit with the intention of restoring the Contingency Fund of India Rules, 1952, as
diverted appropriation to that unit when amended from time to time. For ready
savings become available under other units reference, rules have been placed at
later in the year. Appendix - 6 to this volume.
Rule 65 (4) An application for re-appropriation of Rule 68 Inevitable Payments.
funds shall ordinarily be supported by a
(i) Subject to the provisions of Article 114
statement in Form GFR 1 or any other special
(3) of the Constitution, money
form authorized by departmental regulations
indisputably payable by Government
showing how the excess is proposed to be
shall not ordinarily be left unpaid.
met. In all orders, sanctioning
(ii) Suitable provision for anticipated
reappropriation, the reasons for saving and
liabilities shall invariably be made in
excess of Rupees 1 lakh or over and the
Demands for Grants to be placed
primary units (secondary units, wherever
before Parliament.
necessary), affected shall be invariably
stated. The authority sanctioning the Rule 69 For easy reference an extract relating to
reappropriation shall endorse a copy of the procedures followed in the Accounts Office
order to the Accounts Officer. for check against provision of funds as a part
of pre-check of bills has been placed at
Rule 66 Supplementary Grants. If savings are not
Appendix 10.
available within the Grant to which the
payment is required to be debited, or if the Rule 70 Duties and Responsibilities of the Chief
expenditure is on “New Service” or “New
23
Chapter – 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Accounting Authority. The Secretary of a
Ministry/Department who is the Chief
Accounting Authority of the Ministry/
Department shall: —
(i) be responsible and accountable for
financial management of his Ministry
or Department.
(ii) ensure that the public funds
appropriated to the Ministry or
Department are used for the purpose
for which they were meant.
(iii) be responsible for the effective,
efficient, economical and transparent
use of the resources of the Ministry or
Department in achieving the stated
project objectives of that Ministry or
Department, whilst complying with
performance standards.
(iv) appear before the Committee on
Public Accounts and any other
Parliamentary Committee for
examination.
(v) review and monitor regularly the
performance of the programmes and
projects assigned to his Ministry to
determine whether stated objectives
are achieved.
(vi) be responsible for preparation of
expenditure and other statements
relating to his Ministry or Department
as required by regulations, guidelines
or directives issued by Ministry of
Finance.
(vii) shall ensure that his Ministry or
Department maintains full and proper
records of financial transactions and
adopts systems and procedures that
shall at all times afford internal
controls.
(viii) shall ensure that his Ministry or
Department follows the Government
procurement procedure for execution
of works, as well as for procurement of
services and supplies, and
implements it in a fair, equitable,
transparent, competitive and cost-
effective manner;
(ix) shall take effective and appropriate
steps to ensure his Ministry or
Department : -
(a)collects all moneys due to the
Government and
(b)avoids unauthorized, irregular and
wasteful expenditure.
24
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GOVERNMENT ACCOUNTS
Rule 71 Preparation and presentation of Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
Accounts. Accounts of the Union the transactions in Government accounts
Government shall be prepared every year shall represent the actual cash receipts and
showing the receipts and disbursements disbursements during a financial year as
for the year, surplus or deficit generated distinguished from amounts due to or by
during the year and changes in Government during the same period.
Government liabilities and assets. The Rule 75 Period of Accounts. The annual accounts
accounts shall be prepared by Controller of the Central Government shall record
General of Accounts, certified by the transactions which take place during a
Comptroller and Auditor General of India financial year running from the 1st April to
and along with the report of the the 31st March thereof.
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
Rule 76 Currency in which Accounts are kept.
on these accounts, shall be submitted to
The accounts of Government shall be
the President of India, preferably within six
maintained in Indian Rupees. All foreign
months of close of the Financial Year, who
currency transactions and foreign aid shall
shall cause them to be laid before each
be brought into account after conversion
House of Parliament.
into Indian Rupees.
Rule 72 Form of Accounts. By virtue of the
Rule 77 Main Divisions and structure of
provisions of Article 150 of the
Accounts. The accounts of Government
Constitution, the Accounts of the Union
shall be kept in three parts, Consolidated
Government shall be kept in such form as
Fund (Part-I), Contingency Fund (Part-II)
the President may, on the advice of the
and Public Account (Part-III).
Comptroller and Auditor General of India,
Part-I – Consolidated Fund is divided into
prescribe.
two Divisions, namely, ‘Revenue’ and
The Controller General of Accounts in the
‘Capital’ divisions. The Revenue Division
Ministry of Finance (Department of
comprises the following sections:
Expenditure) is responsible for prescribing
‘Receipt Heads (Revenue Account)’ dealing
the form of accounts of the Union and
with the proceeds of taxation and other
States, and to frame, or revise, rules and
receipts classified as revenue and the
manuals relating thereto on behalf of the
section ‘Expenditure Heads (Revenue
President of India in terms of Article 150 of
Account)’ dealing with the revenue
the Constitution of India, on the advice of
expenditure met therefrom. The Capital
the Comptroller and Auditor General of
Division comprises three sections, viz.,
India.
‘Receipt Heads (Capital Account)’,
Rule 73 Principles of Accounting. The main
‘Expenditure Heads (Capital Account)’ and
principles according to which the accounts
‘Public Debt, Loans and Advances, etc.’.
of the Government of India shall be
These sections are in turn divided into
maintained are contained in Government
sectors such as ‘General Services’, ‘Social
Accounting Rules, 1990; Accounting Rules
and Community Services’, ‘Economic
for Treasuries; and Account Code Volume-
Services’, etc., under which specific
III. Detailed rules and instructions relating
functions or services are grouped
to the forms of the initial and subsidiary
corresponding to the sectors of
accounts to be kept and rendered by
classification and which are represented by
officers of the Department of Posts and
Major Heads (comprising Sub-Major
other technical departments are laid down
Heads wherever necessary).
in the respective Accounts Manuals or in
In Part-II – Contingency Fund- are
the departmental regulations relating to
recorded transactions connected with the
the Departments concerned.
Contingency Fund set up by the
Rule 74 Cash based Accounting. Government
Government of India under Article 267 of
accounts shall be prepared on cash basis.
the Constitution or Section 48 of
With the exception of such book
Government of Union Territories Act,
adjustments as may be authorised by
1963. There shall be a single Major Head
Government Accounting Rules, 1990 or by
to record the transactions thereunder,
any general or special order issued by the
which will be followed by Minor, Sub
Central Government on the advice of the
and/or Detailed Heads.
25
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
In Part-III – Public Account- transactions them in consultation with the Budget
relating to debt (other than those included Division of the Ministry of Finance. Their
in Part-I), reserve funds, deposits, Principal Accounts Offices may open
advances, suspense, remittances and cash Sub/Detailed Heads required under the
balances shall be recorded. Minor Heads falling within the Public
Rule 78 Classification of transactions in Account of India subject to the above
Government Accounts. As a general stipulations.
rule, classification of transactions in The Object Heads have been prescribed
Government Accounts, shall have closer under Government of India’s Orders
reference to functions, programmes and below Rule 8 of Delegation of Financial
activities of the Government and the object Power Rules. The power to amend or
of revenue or expenditure, rather than the modify these Object heads and to open
department in which the revenue or new Object Heads rest with Department of
expenditure occurs. Expenditure of Ministry of Finance on the
Major Heads (comprising Sub-Major advice of the Comptroller and Auditor
Heads wherever necessary) are divided General of India.
into Minor Heads. Minor Heads may have Rule 80 Conformity of budget heads with rules
a number of subordinate heads, generally of classification. Budget Heads exhibited
known as Sub Heads. The Sub Heads are in estimates of receipts and expenditure
further divided into Detailed Heads framed by the Government or in any
followed by Object Heads. appropriation order shall conform to the
The Major Heads of account, falling within prescribed rules of classification.
the sectors for expenditure heads, Rule 81 Responsibility of Departmental
generally correspond to functions of officers. Every officer responsible for the
Government, while the Minor Heads collection of Government dues or
identify the programmes undertaken to expenditure of Government money shall
achieve the objectives of the functions see that proper accounts of the receipts
represented by the Major Head. The Sub and expenditure, as the case may be, are
Head represents schemes, the Detailed maintained in such form as may have been
Head denotes sub scheme and Object prescribed for the financial transactions of
Head represent the primary unit of Government with which he is concerned
appropriation showing the economic and tender accurately and promptly all
nature of expenditure such as salaries and such accounts and returns relating to them
wages, office expenses, travel expenses, as may be required by Government,
professional services, grants-in-aid, etc. Controlling Officer or Accounts Officer, as
The above six tiers are represented by a the case may be.
unique 15 digit numeric code. Rule 82 Classification should be recorded in all
Rule79 Authority to open a new Head of the bills and challans by Drawing
Account. The List of Major and Minor Officers. Suitable classification shall be
Heads of Accounts of Union and States is recorded by Drawing Officers on all bills
maintained by the Ministry of Finance drawn by them. Similarly, classification on
(Department of Expenditure – Controller challans crediting Government money into
General of Accounts) which is authorised the Bank shall be indicated or recorded by
to open a new head of account on the Departmental Officers responsible for the
advice of the Comptroller and Auditor collection of Government dues, etc. In
General of India under the powers flowing cases of doubt regarding the Head under
from Article 150 of the Constitution. It which a transaction should be accounted,
contains General Directions for opening the matter shall be referred to the Principal
Heads of Accounts and a complete list of Accounts Officer of the Ministry/
the Sectors, Major, Sub-Major and Minor Department concerned for clarification of
Heads of Accounts and also some the Ministry of Finance and the Controller
Sub/detailed heads, authorised to be so General of Accounts, wherever necessary.
opened. Rule 83 Charged or Voted Expenditure. The
Ministries/Departments may open Sub- expenditure covered under Article 112 (3)
Heads and Detailed Heads as required by of the Constitution of India is charged on
26
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
the Consolidated Fund of India and is not laid down in the Memoranda of
subject to vote by the legislature. All other Instructions issued by the Reserve Bank of
expenditure met out of the Consolidated India.
Fund of India is treated as Voted Rule 86 Public Financial Management System
expenditure. Charged or Voted (PFMS).—
Expenditure shall be shown separately in
(1) Public Financial Management System
the accounts as well as in the Budget
(PFMS), an integrated Financial
documents.
Management System of Controller
Rule 84 Capital or Revenue Expenditure. General of Accounts, Government of
Significant expenditure incurred with the India, shall be used for sanction
object of acquiring tangible assets of a preparation, bill processing, payment,
permanent nature (for use in the receipt management, Direct Benefit
organisation and not for sale in the Transfer, fund flow management and
ordinary course of business) or enhancing financial reporting.
the utility of existing assets, shall broadly
(2) All the ministries sanctioning grant-in-
be defined as Capital expenditure.
aid shall register all implementing
Subsequent charges on maintenance, agencies till last level of
repair, upkeep and working expenses, implementation on PFMS to track fund
which are required to maintain the assets flow and unspent balances.
in a running order as also all other
(3) All the payment, to the extent possible,
expenses incurred for the day to day
shall be released ‘just-in-time’ by the
running of the organisation, including
Ministries through PFMS.
establishment and administrative
(4) Detailed Demand for Grants (DDG),
expenses shall be classified as Revenue
as approved, must be uploaded on
expenditure. Capital and Revenue
PFMS at the start of each Financial
expenditure shall be shown separately in
Year.
the Accounts.
(5) All the re-appropriation orders,
Rule 85 Banking Arrangements. The Reserve
surrender order shall be generated
Bank of India (RBI) shall be the banker to
through PFMS system.
the Government. It shall maintain cash
balance of the Government and provide (6) All grantee institutions shall submit
banking facilities to the Ministries and Utilisation Certificates on PFMS.
subordinate or attached offices either Rule 87 Direct Benefit Transfer.
directly through its own offices or through (1) Transfer of benefits should be done
its agent banks. For this purpose, RBI shall, directly to beneficiaries under various
in consultation with the Controller General Government Schemes and
of Accounts, nominate a bank to function Programmes using Information and
as Accredited Bank of a Ministry or Communication Technology (ICT).
Department. Pay & Accounts offices and Necessary process reengineering to
Cheque Drawing and Disbursing Officer minimise intermediary levels and to
shall have assignment accounts with the reduce delay in payments to intended
identified branches of the Accredited Bank beneficiaries with the objective of
of the Ministry. All payments shall be made minimising pilferage and duplication
through these identified bank branches. should be done for all Government
These branches shall also collect Schemes and Programmes. The
departmental and other receipts. Tax process for implementation of DBT as
revenues of the Government shall be prescribed should be adopted.
collected by the RBI through its own offices
(2) DBT should include in-kind and cash
or through the nominated branches of its
transfers to beneficiaries as well as
agent banks.
transfers/honorariums given to
Note: Detailed procedure to be followed various enablers of government
for remittance of Government receipts into schemes like community workers, etc.
Government cash balance and for successful implementation of the
reimbursement of payments made on schemes.
behalf of Government by the banks are
27
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(3) Transfer of cash benefits from be submitted to Parliament, shall be
Ministries/Departments should be prepared annually by the Controller
done (a) directly to beneficiaries from General of Accounts by consolidating the
Ministries/Departments; (b) through aforesaid Appropriation Accounts.
State Treasury Account; or (c) through Appropriation Accounts pertaining to
any Implementing Agency as Departments of Posts and Defence Services
appointed by Centre/State shall be prepared and signed by the
Governments. Secretaries to the Government of India in
(4) In-kind Transfer to Individual the Department of Posts and Ministry of
Beneficiary/ Household/Service Defence respectively and that of Ministry of
provider includes schemes or Railways by the Chairman, Railway Board.
components of schemes where in-kind Rule 89 Finance Accounts. Annual accounts of
benefits are given by the Government the Government of India (including
or through any Implementing Agency transactions of Department of Posts and
as appointed by Centre/State Ministries of Defence and Railways and
Governments to Individual transactions under Public Account of India
Beneficiary/Household/Service of Union Territory Governments), showing
providers. under the respective Heads the annual
(5) Ministries/Departments will use PFMS receipts and disbursements and statement
platform for processing of payments of balances for the purpose of the Union,
for cash / in kind transfers to called Finance Accounts, shall be prepared
individual beneficiaries as per and signed by the Controller General of
framework laid down by Department Accounts countersigned by the Secretary
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance. (Expenditure), Ministry of Finance.
(6) Implementing Agencies shall Rule 90 Presentation of Annual accounts. The
generate Electronic Utilisation Appropriation and Finance accounts
Certificate (E-UCs) on PFMS portal mentioned above, shall be prepared by the
and submit them online. E-UCs shall respective authorities on the dates mutually
be used to certify that money was agreed upon with the Comptroller and
actually utilized for the purpose for Auditor General of India, in the forms
which it was sanctioned to eliminate prescribed by the President on the advice of
the need for physical generation of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
UCs. India and sent to the latter for recording
his/her certificate. The certified Annual
(7) Transaction charges for the financial
Accounts and the Reports relating to the
intermediaries facilitating DBT
accounts shall be submitted by the
payments shall be paid as stipulated
Comptroller and Auditor General of India
by Ministry of Finance.
to the President in accordance with the
provisions of Section 11 of the Comptroller
II. ANNUAL ACCOUNTS and Auditor General’s (Duties, Powers and
Conditions of Service) Act, 1971 and
Rule 88 Appropriation Accounts. Appropriation Clause (1) of Article 151 of the Constitution
Accounts of Central Ministries (other than of India.
Ministry of Railways) and of Central Civil Rule 91 Administrative Ministries / PSUs /
Departments (excluding Department of Subordinate / Statutory / Autonomous
Posts and Defence Services) shall be Bodies may have financial stakes in Public
prepared by the Principal Accounts Private Partnerships (PPP)/ Production
Officers of the respective Ministries and Sharing Contracts (PSCs)/ Joint Ventures
Departments (under the guidance and (JV’s)/ Subsidiary companies etc. In such
supervision of the Controller General of case details of the financial stakes of the
Accounts) and signed by their respective Government or other entities mentioned
Chief Accounting Authorities i.e., the above, should be disclosed in the Annual
Secretaries in the concerned Ministries or Report of the Administrative Ministry.
Departments. Union Government
Appropriation Accounts (Civil) required to
28
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
III. PROFORMA ACCOUNTS Rule 95 Maintenance and submission of
Rule 92 Subsidiary Accounts of Government subsidiary accounts and statements by
Departments undertaking commercial department units. The Head of the unit
activities. Where the operations of certain shall arrange to obtain the orders of
Government Departments working on a Government regarding the nature and
commercial or quasi-commercial basis form of subsidiary accounts and
e.g., an industrial factory or a store cannot statements, if any. Such accounts and
be suitably brought within the cash based statements shall be submitted to the
Government accounting system, the Head Accounts Officer on such date as may be
of the units shall be required to maintain required by him. The same shall be
such subsidiary proforma accounts in appended to the Appropriation Accounts
commercial form as may be agreed of each year.
between Government and Comptroller
and Auditor General of India. This IV. PERSONAL DEPOSIT ACCOUNTS
includes the maintenance of suitable
Manufacturing, Trading, Profit & Loss
Rule 96 Personal Deposit Account. Personal
Accounts and Balance Sheet.
Deposit Account is a device intended to
Rule 93 Methods and principles on which
facilitate the Designated Officer thereof to
subsidiary accounts in commercial
credit receipts into and effect withdrawals
form are to be kept. The methods and
directly from the account, subject to an
principles in accordance with which
overall check being exercised by the bank
subsidiary and proforma accounts in
in which the account is authorised to be
commercial form are to be kept shall be
opened. The Designated Officer shall
regulated by orders and instructions
ensure (with the help of a personal ledger
issued by Government in each case.
account to be maintained by the bank for
Note 1. Proforma accounts of regular the purpose) that no withdrawal will result
Government Workshops and Factories in a minus balance therein. Only
shall be kept in accordance with the Government officers acting in their official
detailed rules and procedure prescribed in or any other capacity shall be the
the departmental regulations. Proforma Designated Officer thereof.
accounts relating to Public Works shall be
Rule 97 (1) Authority to open Personal Deposit
prepared by the Accounts Officers in
Account. The Personal Deposit Account
accordance with the instructions contained
shall be authorised to be opened by a
in Account Code for Accountants General.
special order by the concerned Ministry or
Note 2. The Heads of Account (which Department in consultation with the
should, as far as possible, be common to Controller General of Accounts. Such
the Government accounts and the special order or permission shall be issued
General Ledger maintained by a or granted by the Ministry or Department
Commercial Undertaking) shall be concerned after it is satisfied that the initial
selected with due regard to the principles accounts of the moneys to be held in a
of Governmental and Commercial personal deposit account and disbursed,
accounting so that the monthly classified shall be arranged to be maintained
account of income and expenditure of the properly and shall be subject to audit.
undertaking may be prepared readily Every personal deposit account so
from the General Ledger maintained by it. authorised to be opened, shall form part of
Rule 94 Adequate regulations to be framed to the Government Account and be located in
ensure cost deduced is accurate and the Public Account thereof. The provisions
true. Where commercial accounts are relating to “Personal Deposit Account” are
maintained for the purpose of assessment contained in para 16.7 of Civil Accounts
of the cost of an article or service, the Head Manual and Rule 191 to 194 of Central
of the unit shall ensure that adequate Government Account (Receipts and
regulations are framed with the approval Payments) Rules.
of Government in order to ensure that the Rule 97 (2) Personal Deposit accounts shall
cost deduced from the accounts is generally be authorised to be opened in
accurate and true. the following types of cases:
29
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
considered as a capital expenditure and
(a) in favour of a Designated Officer
shall not, except in cases specifically
appointed for the purpose of
authorised by the President on the advice
administering monies tendered by or
of the Comptroller and Auditor General of
on behalf of wards and attached
India, be debited to a Capital Head.
estates under Government
management. It shall also be ensured Capital expenditure is generally met from
that proper arrangements are made receipts of capital nature, as distinguished
for the maintenance and audit of from ordinary revenues derived from
connected initial accounts; taxes, duties, fees, fines and similar items
of current income including extraordinary
(b) in relation to Civil and Criminal
receipts. It is open to the Government to
Courts’ deposits, in favour of the
meet capital expenditure from ordinary
Chief Judicial Authority concerned;
revenues, provided there are sufficient
(c) where, under certain regulatory
revenue resources to cover this liability.
activities of the Government, receipts
Expenditure of a Capital nature as defined
are realised and credited to a Fund or
above, shall not be classed as Capital
Account under the provisions of an Act
expenditure in the Government Accounts
to be utilised towards expenditure
unless the classification has been expressly
thereunder and no outgo from the
authorised by general or special orders of
Consolidated Fund is involved.
Government.
(d) where a personal deposit account is
Expenditure of a Capital nature shall be
required to be created by a law or
distinguished from the Revenue
rules having the force of law and
Expenditure both in the Budget Estimates
certain liabilities devolve on the
and in Government Accounts.
Government out of the special
enactments; Rule 99 Principles for allocation of expenditure
between Capital and Revenue. The
(e) officers commanding units and others
following are the main principles
concerned in the administration of
governing the allocation of expenditure
public funds in the Defence
between Revenue and Capital:
Departments can be authorised to
open personal deposit accounts for (a) Capital shall bear all charges for the
such funds. first construction and equipment of a
project as well as charges for
intermediate maintenance of the work
V. CAPITAL AND REVENUE ACCOUNTS
while not yet opened for service. It
shall also bear charges for such
Rule 98 Capital Expenditure. Significant further additions and improvements,
expenditure incurred with the object of which enhance the useful life of the
acquiring tangible assets of a permanent asset, as may be sanctioned under
nature (for use in the organisation and not rules made by competent authority.
for sale in the ordinary course of business) (b) Subject to Clause (c) below, revenue
or enhancing the utility of existing assets, shall bear subsequent charges for
shall broadly be defined as Capital maintenance and all working
expenditure. Subsequent, charges on expenses. These embrace all
maintenance, repair, upkeep and working expenditure on the working and
expenses, which are required to maintain upkeep of the project and also on
the assets in a running order as also all renewals and replacements and
other expenses incurred for the day to day additions, improvements or
running of the organisation, including extensions that are revenue in nature
establishment and administrative as per rules made by Government.
expenses, shall be classified as Revenue
(c) In the case of works of renewal and
expenditure. Capital and Revenue
replacement, which partake
expenditure shall be shown separately in
expenditure both of a capital and
the Accounts.
revenue nature, the allocation of
Expenditure on a temporary asset or on expenditure shall be regulated by the
grants-in-aid cannot ordinarily be
30
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
broad principle that Revenue should Rule 101 Capital receipts during construction
pay or provide a fund for the mainly to be utilised in reduction of
adequate re- placement of all capital expenditure :
wastage or depreciation of property Capital receipts in so far they relate to
originally provided out of capital expenditure previously debited to Capital
grants. Only the cost of genuine accruing during the process of construction
improvements, which enhance the of a project, shall be utilised in reduction of
useful life of the asset whether capital expenditure. Thereafter their
determined by prescribed rules or treatment in the accounts will depend on
formulae, or under special orders of circumstances, but except under special
Government, may be debited to rule or order of Government, they shall not
Capital. Where under special orders be credited to the revenue account of the
of Government, a Depreciation or department or undertaking.
Renewals Reserve Fund is established
Rule 102 Receipts and recoveries representing
for renewing assets of any commercial
recoveries of expenditure previously
department or undertaking, the
debited to Capital Major Head: Receipts
distribution of expenditure on
and recoveries on Capital Account in so far
renewals and replacements between
as they represent recoveries of expenditure
Capital and the Fund shall be so
previously debited to a Capital Major
regulated as to guard against
Head shall be taken in reduction of
overcapitalisation on the one hand
expenditure under the Major Head
and excessive withdrawals from the
concerned except where, under the rules of
Fund on the other.
allocation applicable to a particular
(d) Expenditure on account of reparation department, such receipts have to be taken
of damage caused by extraordinary to Revenue.
calamities such as flood, fire,
Rule 103 Conversion of outstanding loans into
earthquake, enemy action, etc., shall
equity investments or grants-in-aid.
be charged to Capital, or to Revenue,
Government takes from time to time,
or divided between them, depending
suitable measures to strengthen/
upon whether such expenditure results
restructure the Capital base of public
in creation/acquisition of new assets
sector enterprises so that these enterprises
or whether it is only for restoring the
can improve their performance and
condition of the existing assets, as
productivity. As a part of the package
may be determined by Government
scheme, financial relief in the form of
according to the circumstance of each
conversion of outstanding loans into equity
case.
investments or grants-in-aid are also
(e) Expenditure on a temporary asset agreed to.
cannot ordinarily be considered as a
Where loans outstanding against Public
capital expenditure and shall not,
Sector Undertakings are proposed to be
except in cases specifically authorised
converted into equity investments in or as
by the President on the advice of the
grants-in-aid to the Public Sector
Comptroller and Auditor General of
Undertakings, the approval of the
India, be debited to a Capital Head.
Parliament to such proposals, shall be
Rule 100 Allocation between capital and obtained by including a token provision in
revenue expenditure : The allocation the relevant Demands for Grants or
between capital and revenue expenditure Supplementary Demands for Grants as
on a Capital Scheme for which separate may be found expedient. The details of
Capital and Revenue Accounts are to be such conversion of loans may be explained
kept, shall be determined in accordance in the relevant Budget/Supplementary
with such general or special orders as may Demand documents. After obtaining the
be prescribed by the Government after approval of the Parliament, the balances
consultation with the Comptroller and under loans and the progressive
Auditor General of India. expenditure of the Capital Heads of
Accounts shall be corrected proforma in
the relevant Accounts of the Union
31
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Government, under the Loan/Capital VII. ADJUSTMENT WITH GOVERNMENT
Major Heads concerned. DEPARTMENTS ETC
VI. INTEREST ON CAPITAL Rule 108 Adjustments with State Governments.
Subject to the relevant provision of the
Constitution or of law made by Parliament
Rule 104 Interest rate. Except in special cases
or any orders issued thereunder,
regulated by special orders of
adjustments in respect of financial
Government, interest at such rates as may
transactions with State Governments shall,
be specified from time to time shall be
unless otherwise provided for, be made in
charged in the accounts of all Commercial
such manner, and to such extent as may be
Departments or units for which separate
mutually agreed upon between the Central
capital and revenue accounts are
Government and the State Government
maintained within the Government
concerned. However, adjustments with
accounts.
State Government in respect of the matters
Rule 105 (1) Charging of interest on capital
mentioned below shall be regulated by the
outlay met out of specific loans raised
rules contained in Appendix-5 to the
by Government. For capital outlay met
Government Accounting Rules, 1990. The
out of specific loans raised by
rules are based on reciprocal
Government, the interest shall be charged
arrangements made with the State
at such rate as may be prescribed by
Governments and are, therefore, binding
Government, having regard to the rate of
on all of them:-
interest actually paid on such loans and
(i) Pay and Allowances, other than Leave
the incidental charges incurred in raising
Salaries.
and managing them.
(ii) Leave Salaries.
By specific loans are meant loans that are
raised in the open market for one specific (iii) Pensions.
purpose which is clearly specified in the (iv) Expenditure involved in Audit and
prospectus and in regard to which definite keeping Accounts.
information is given at the time of raising (v) Cost of Police functions on Railways
of the loans. including the cost of protecting
Rule 105 (2) For capital outlay provided otherwise, Railway Bridges.
interest shall be charged at the rate of (vi) Cost of Forest Surveys carried out by
interest to be determined each year by the the Survey of India, and Forest maps
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry prepared by that Department.
of Finance.
(vii) Leave Salary and Pension
Rule 106 Method of calculation of interest. The Contributions recovered in respect of
interest shall be calculated on the direct Government servants lent on Foreign
capital outlay at the end of the previous Service
year plus half the outlay of the year itself,
Rule 109 Re-audit. As a convention, a period of
irrespective of whether such outlay has
three years has been accepted by the
been met from current revenues or from
Central and State Governments for the re-
other sources.
audit of past transactions involving errors
Rule 107 How interest charged to capital is to be in classification
written back. When under any special
Rule 110 When adjustment necessary.
orders of Government, charges for interest
Adjustment shall always be made unless
during the process of construction of a
otherwise agreed upon —
project are temporarily met from capital,
(a) If a commercial department or
the writing back of capitalised interest shall
undertaking or a regularly organised
form the first charge on any capital
store department or store section of a
receipts or surplus revenue derived from
department is concerned, or
the project when opened for working.
(b) If under the operation of any rule or
order, an adjustment would have been
made if the particular transaction with
32
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
State Government were a transaction of the Governments incurring the
between two departments of the expenditure initially
Central Government.
Rule 114 Claims of State Governments on
Rule 111 Petty and isolated claims for services account of the extra cost of agency
rendered not to be preferred. The functions. Claims of State Governments,
Central Government (which includes on account of the extra cost of agency
Union Territories) and the State functions entrusted to them under Article
Governments have agreed under 258 of the Constitution shall be dealt with
reciprocal arrangements not to prefer and settled in accordance with such
petty and isolated claims for an amount directions as may be issued by the
not exceeding Rupees ten thousand President in this regard from time to time
against one another
Rule 115 The following principles shall be generally
Rule 112 Criteria in determining whether a observed in dealing with claims preferred
particular claim is covered by the by State Governments under Clause (3) of
reciprocal arrangement. The significant Article 258 of the Constitution: —
criterion in determining whether a
(i) If the agency work involves the
particular claim is covered by the
employment of a State Commercial
reciprocal arrangement mentioned
Department, it would be open to that
above, will be that the claim shall be both
department to charge its normal
petty and of an occasional character and
commercial costs.
shall cover services rendered and not
(ii) Public Works Department agency costs
supplies made unless the latter forms part
shall be represented by such
of service. The term “service rendered” will
percentage charges on the cost of
be taken to mean an individual act of
Central Works executed by the State as
service, like providing police escort to a
may be agreed between the Central
high dignitary and will not apply to supply
and the State Government concerned,
of stores etc. Claims relating to
works outlay being treated as an
Commercial undertakings under the
amount placed at the disposal of the
Government of India or the State
State Government for actual
Governments such as those of the
expenditure on the execution of the
Railways, the Department of Post, the
work.
Electrical undertakings, etc., shall fall
(iii) The cost of regular joint establishment
outside the purview of the proposed
shall be shared as far as practicable
reciprocal arrangements and shall
on the basis of fixed annual sums
continue to be settled as hitherto.
settled in agreement with the State
If a doubt arises as to whether a particular
Government concerned.
claim would fall within or outside the
(iv) In other cases, the following
purview of the proposed arrangement, it
procedure shall be adopted unless
shall be decided by mutual consultation.
there are special orders to the
The above arrangements will remain in
contrary:-
force without any time limit in respect of all
State Governments. (a) Details of claims preferred by
State Governments shall be
Rule 113 Projects jointly executed by several
ascertained.
State Governments. In the case of
Projects, jointly executed by several (b) If the work has been performed by
Governments, where the expenditure is to the State Government in the past,
be shared by the participating the charges shall be compared
Governments in agreed proportions, but with those charged in the past but
the expenditure is ab-initio incurred by one it is not necessary to be meticulous
Government and shares of other in the matter.
participating Governments recovered (c) If the charges are found to be
subsequently; such recoveries from other reasonable and do not exceed
Governments shall be exhibited as Rupees Fifty thousand per annum
abatement of charges under the relevant for any individual item (or
expenditure Head of Account in the books connected group of items), a five
33
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
years contract shall be offered to concerned Demand of the Ministry
the State Government during administratively concerned with the
which the Central Government subject. In computing the extra cost,
would pay the fixed sum per the element of leave and pensionary
annum for the work. The amount charges can also be included,
will be subjected to review at the provided the relevant service and
end of each period of five years. financial rules of the State
(d) If the amount agreed upon Governments provide for this.
exceeds Rupees Fifty thousand, it (ii) The expenditure on work entrusted
shall be necessary to have an to the State Government, such as
annual statement of proposed expenditure on construction and
charges from the State maintenance of National
Government at the time of Highways, expenditure on Defence
preparation of the Budget. Works, Aviation Works, etc.-The
However, if in any individual case, expenditure directly connected with
the charges are obviously static, the execution of the scheme or work
then the contract system may be entrusted to the State Government
adopted in these cases also. such as expenditure on the
(v) In exceptional cases in which construction or maintenance of
arbitration has to be resorted to, the National Highways etc., will be
Ministry of Finance will make the adjusted direct in the accounts of the
requisite arrangement in the matter. Central Government under the
relevant Head of Account. The
(vi) The Ministry of Finance shall be
question of including the estimates in
consulted on all matters arising under
this regard in the Budget of the State
Article 258 (3) of the Constitution.
Governments and subjecting them to
Rule 116 Principles governing transactions in
the vote of the State Legislature will not
connection with the agency functions
arise. The expenditure will be adjusted
entrusted to State Government. The
under the Head “8658 – Suspense
following procedure shall be followed in
Accounts –PAO Suspense” in the
regard to transactions arising in
Remittance Section of the State
connection with the agency functions
Accounts in the first instance pending
entrusted to the State Governments under
their eventual clearance in accordance
Article 258 of the Constitution:
with the prescribed procedure.
(i) The expenditure on extra staff or
Note: In the converse case relating to the
contingencies which the State
entrustment of a State function to the
Government have to incur-The
Central Government under Article258-A
extra cost to the State Government
of the Constitution, a procedure similar to
arising mainly in respect of the
that indicated in the Rule 116 above shall
additional staff employed or
be followed. The extra cost on staff and
contingent and other expenditure, as
other contingent expenditure, etc., will
in the case of work devolving on the
accordingly have to be provided in the
State Governments in connection with
Budget of the Central Government in the
the administration of the Census Act,
usual manner and recovery made in
is reimbursable under Article 258 (3)
lumpsum from the State Government
of the Constitution. Expenditure in this
concerned. The other expenditure on
regard shall be provided in the State
execution of the work proper should be
Budget in the first instance and
debited to the State Government
adjusted in the accounts of the State
concerned directly and the question of
Governments under the normal
obtaining a vote of the Parliament for the
Heads of Accounts. These will be
same will not arise.
reimbursed in lumpsum to the State
Rule 117 Crucial date for closure of Inter-
Governments, necessary provision
Governmental adjustments. Inter-
being made under a distinct sub-head
Governmental adjustments can be carried
”Amounts paid to other Governments,
out upto the 15th of April on which date the
Departments, etc.”, under the
34
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
books of the Reserve Bank are closed for country is regulated by the following
the month of March. Every endeavour principles;
must, therefore, be made to settle as far as
(i) Maintenance – Half the maintenance
possible all transactions with State
charges will be borne by the Central
Governments before the close of the year.
Government, the other half being
Rule 118 Adjustments with foreign recovered, as far as practicable, from
Governments, outside bodies, etc. the foreign country, failing which the
Unless exempted by Government by foreign country’s share will also be
general or special orders, services shall borne by the Central Government.
not be rendered to any foreign
(iii) Demarcation and Disputes – Charges
Government or non-Government body or
relating to demarcation of boundaries
institution or to a separate fund constituted
and boundary disputes will be borne
as such except on payment.
by the Central Government under
Rule 119 Recoveries of expenditure for services Entry 10 of the Union List, subject to
rendered to non-Government parties. such recovery as shall be made from
Recoveries of expenditure for services the Foreign Country.
rendered or supplies made to non-
(iii) Where streams or other watercourses
Government parties or other
form the boundaries and where the
Governments (including local funds and
ordinary principle of median line
Governments outside India), shall in all
applies, the Government concerned
cases, be classified as receipts of the
(i.e., Foreign Country or India) will
Government rendering such services.
bear the cost of maintenance of the
Rule 120 Recoveries of expenditure for services boundary line on its side. Where a
rendered as an agent. When a separate set of survey marks is
Government undertakes a service merely maintained by each of the two
as an agent of a private body, the entire Governments on its side, the cost of
cost of the service shall be recovered from maintenance of the survey marks shall
that body so that the net cost to be borne by the Government
Government is nil. The recoveries shall be concerned.
taken as reduction of expenditure.
Exception:
Explanation: The term ‘recovery’ is used
(a) The arrangement in (i) above in its
in these rules to denote repayment of, or
application to Nepal will be
payment by non-Government parties or
subject to special arrangements
other Governments towards charges
worked out in consultation with
initially incurred and classified by a
the Nepal Government.
Central Government Department in the
(b) The share of the Bhutan
account, as final expenditure by debit to a
Government for maintenance
Revenue or Capital Head of Account.
and demarcation of and disputes
Recoveries towards establishment
over boundaries will be borne by
charges, tools and plants, fees for
the Central Government for the
procurement of inspection of stores or
present
both etc., effected at percentage rates or
otherwise, are some examples.
VIII. INTER-DEPARTMENTAL
Rule 121 Payments to outside body or fund to be
ADJUSTMENTS
through grant-in-aid. Any relief in
respect of payment for services rendered
or supplies made to any outside body or Rule 123 Inter-Departmental Adjustments. Save
fund shall ordinarily be given through a as expressly provided by any general or
grant-in-aid rather than by remission of special orders, a Service Department shall
dues. not charge other Departments for services
Rule 122 Charges relating to the maintenance rendered or supplies made which falls
and demarcations and disputes over within the class of duties for which the
boundaries. The incidence of charges former Department is constituted.
relating to the maintenance and However, a commercial Department or
demarcations and disputes over
boundaries between India and a foreign
35
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
undertaking shall ordinarily charge and departmental adjustments. The
be charged for any supplies made and settlement of inter-departmental
services rendered to, or by, other adjustments shall be regulated by the
departments of Government. directions contained in Chapter 4 of
Government Accounting Rules, 1990.
Rule 124 Principles for division of Departments
for purposes of inter-departmental Rule 127 Inter-departmental and other
payments. For purposes of inter- adjustments to be made in the account
Departmental payments, the Departments year. Under the directions contained in the
of a Government shall be divided into Account Code for Accountants General,
service Departments and commercial Inter-departmental and other adjustments
departments according to the following are not to be made in the accounts of the
principles:- past year, if they could not have been
reasonably anticipated in time for funds
(i) Service Departments. -These are
being obtained from the proper authority.
constituted for the discharge of those
In all cases, where the adjustment could
functions which either-
have reasonably been anticipated as, for
(a) Are inseparable from and form
example, recurring payments to another
part of the idea of Government
Government or department and payments
e.g. Departments of
which, though not of fixed amount, are of a
Administration of Justice, Jails,
fixed character, etc., the Accounts Officer
Police, Education, Medical, Public
will automatically make the adjustment in
Health, Forest, Defence; or
the accounts before they are finally closed.
(b) Are necessary to, and form part The onus of proving that the adjustments
of, the general conduct of the could not have been reasonably
business of Government e.g. anticipated should lie with the Controlling
Departments of Survey, Officer.
Government Printing, Stationery,
As between different Departments of the
Public Works (Building and Roads
same Government, the recoveries effected
Branch), Central Purchase
for services rendered shall be classified as
Organisation (Director-General
deductions from the gross expenditure.
of Supplies and Disposals, New
However, recoveries made by a
Delhi).
Commercial Department, e.g., Railways,
(ii) Commercial Departments or Posts or a departmental commercial
Undertakings.-These are established undertaking in respect of services rendered
mainly for the purposes of rendering in pursuance of the functions for which the
services or providing supplies, of Commercial Department is constituted
certain special kinds, on payment for shall be treated as receipts of the
the services rendered or for the Department but where it acts as an agent
articles supplied. They perform for the discharge of functions not germane
functions, which are not necessarily to the essential purpose of the Department,
governmental functions. They are the recoveries shall be taken as reduction
required to work to a financial result of expenditure.
determined through accounts
Exception.-Recoveries of fees for
maintained on commercial principles.
purchase, inspection, etc., effected by the
Rule 125 Period for preferment of claims. All Central Purchase Organizations of
claims shall ordinarily be preferred Government of India, are treated as
between Departments, both commercial receipts of the Department concerned.
and non-commercial of the Central
NOTE 1.-The term ‘recovery’ is used in this
Government, within the same financial
rule to denote repayment of/or payment by
year and not beyond three years from the
one Department of the same Government
date of transaction. This limitation,
towards charges initially incurred and
however, may be waived in specific cases
classified by another Department in its
by mutual agreement between the
accounts as final expenditure by debit to a
departments concerned.
Revenue or Capital Head of Account.
Rule 126 Procedure for settlement of inter- Recoveries towards establishment charges,
36
Chapter – 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
tools and plants, fees for procurement or pension as prescribed in the appropriate
inspection of stores or both, etc., effected order issued from time to time under
at percentage rates or otherwise, are some Appendix-II of Fundamental and
examples. Supplementary Rules.
NOTE 2.-Recoveries effected from another
Department of the same Government
which are to be classified as deduction
from the gross expenditure, shall be shown
in the relevant Demand for Grant as
“below the line” recovery under the
appropriate Major Head of Account etc.
Recovery actually effected, irrespective of
the year to which it relates shall be
adjusted in accounts in the schedule of
recovery to be attached to the
Appropriation Account of the year in which
the recovery is effected.
Rule 128 Adjustment of Pensionary Charges of
certain Commercial Departments.
Except as otherwise provided, the
pensionary liability of commercial
departments and undertakings, for which
pro forma commercial accounts are
maintained, shall be assessed on a
contribution basis at such rates as may be
fixed by Government from time to time. In
the case of departments and
undertakings, for which no regular
commercial accounts are maintained
either within or outside the regular
Government accounts but which are
allowed to charge for their products or
services rendered, the pensionary liability
shall be taken into account in the estimate
of overhead charges and manufacturing
costs for the purpose of calculating the
issue price of goods manufactured or fees
for services rendered. The calculation shall
be made at rates prescribed for the
purpose by Government.
NOTE: The Railways, Posts and Defence
Departments are regarded as separate
Governments for the purpose of
adjustment of pensionary charges.
Rule: 129 Pensionary liability in the case of
Government Departments/
Undertakings declared as commercial.
In the case of Government Departments
and Undertakings declared as
commercial, adjustment of Pensionary
liability shall be made in the regular
accounts by charging the average of the
percentage for 15th year of service based
on the rates of monthly contribution of
37
Chapter – 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
WORKS
Rule 130 Original works means all new estimated to cost above Rupees thirty Lakhs
constructions, site preparation, additions and original works of any value to:
and alterations to existing works, special (i) any Public Sector Undertaking set up
repairs to newly purchased or previously by the Central or State Government to
abandoned buildings or structures, carry out civil or electrical works or
including remodelling or replacement.
(ii) to any other Central/ State
Minor works mean works which add Government organisation /PSU which
capital value to existing assets but do not may be notified by the Ministry of
create new assets. Urban Development (MoUD) for such
Repair works means works undertaken to purpose after evaluating their
maintain building and fixtures. Works will financial strength and technical
also include services or goods incidental competence.
or consequential to the original or repair For the award of work under this sub-rule,
works. the Ministry/ Department shall ensure
Rule 131 Administrative control of works competition among such PSUs/
includes: Organisations. This competition shall be
(i) assumption of full responsibility for essentially on the lump sum service
construction, maintenance and charges to be claimed for execution of
upkeep; work.
(ii) proper utilization of buildings and In exceptional cases, for award of work
allied works; under (i) and (ii) above, on nomination
basis, the conditions contained in Rule 194
(iii) provision of funds for execution of
would apply. The work under these
these functions.
circumstances shall also be awarded only
Rule 132 Powers to sanction works. The powers
on the basis of lump sum service charge
delegated to various subordinate
Rule 134 Work under the administrative control
authorities to accord administrative
of the Public Works Departments.
approval, sanction expenditure and re-
Works not specifically allotted to any
appropriate funds for works are regulated
Ministry or Department shall be included in
by the Delegation of Financial Powers
the Grants for Civil Works to be
Rules, and other orders contained in the
administered by Central Public Works
respective departmental regulations.
Department. No such work may be
Rule 133 (1) A Ministry or Department at its
financed partly from funds provided in
discretion may directly execute repair
departmental budget and partly from the
works estimated to cost up to Rupees Thirty
budget for Civil works as mentioned
Lakhs after following due procedure
above.
indicated in Rule 139, 159 & 160.
Rule 135 (1) General Rules. Subject to the
Rule 133 (2) A Ministry or Department may, at its
observance of these general rules,
discretion, assign repair works estimated
(including Rule 144)the initiation,
to cost above Rupees thirty Lakhs and
authorization and execution of works
original/minor works of any value to any
allotted to a particular Ministry or
Public Works Organisation (PWO) such as
Department shall be regulated by detailed
Central Public Works Department
rules and orders contained in the
(CPWD), State Public Works Department,
respective departmental regulations and
others Central Government organisations
by other special orders applicable to them.
authorised to carry out civil or electrical
Rule 135 (2) Ministry or Department shall put in
works such as Military Engineering Service
place, as far as possible, empowered
(MES), Border Roads Organisation (BRO),
project teams for all large value projects
etc. or Ministry/Department’s construction
and these teams should be tasked only with
wings of Ministries of Railways, Defence,
project execution and not given other
Environment & Forests, Information &
operational duties.
Broadcasting and Departments of Posts,
and Space etc. Rule 136 (1) No works shall be commenced or
liability incurred in connection with it until:
Rule 133 (3) As an alternative to 133(2), a Ministry
or Department may award repair works (i) administrative approval has been
38
Chapter – 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
obtained from the appropriate applied to carry out additional work not
authority in each case. contemplated in the original project.
(ii) sanction to incur expenditure has Rule 139 Procedure for Execution of Works. The
been obtained from the competent broad procedure to be followed by a
authority. Ministry or Department for execution of
(iii) a properly detailed design has been works under its own arrangements shall be
sanctioned; while designing the as under :-
projects etc, principles of Life Cycle (i) the detailed procedure relating to
cost may also be considered. expenditure on such works shall be
(iv) estimates containing the detailed prescribed by departmental
specifications and quantities of regulations framed in consultation
various items have been prepared on with the Accounts Officer, generally
the basis of the Schedule of Rates based on the procedures and the
maintained by CPWD or other Public principles underlying the financial and
Works Organisations and sanctioned. accounting rules prescribed for similar
(v) funds to cover the charge during the works carried out by the Central Public
year have been provided by Works Department (CPWD);
competent authority. (ii) preparation of detailed design and
(vi) tenders invited and processed in estimates shall precede any sanction
accordance with rules. for works;
(vii) a Work Order issued. (iii) no work shall be undertaken before
Issue of Administrative Approval and
Rule 136 (2) On grounds of urgency or otherwise, if
Expenditure Sanction by the competent
it becomes necessary to carry out a work or
Authority on the basis of estimates
incur a liability under circumstances when
framed;
the provisions set out under sub rule 1 of
rule 136 cannot be complied with, the (iv) Open tenders will be called for works
concerned executive officer may do so on costing Rs. Five lakh to Rs. Thirty lakh;
his own judgement and responsibility. (v) limited tenders will be called for works
Simultaneously, he should initiate action to costing less than Rupees five lakhs;
obtain approval from the competent (vi) execution of Contract Agreement or
authority and also to intimate the Award of work should be done before
concerned Accounts Officer. commencement of the work;
Rule 136 (3) Any development of a project (vii) final payment for work shall be made
considered necessary while a work is in only on the Personal Certificate of the
progress, which is not contingent on the Officer-in-charge of execution of the
execution of work as first sanctioned, shall work in the format given below:
have to be covered by a supplementary
“I …... Executing Officer of (Name of
estimate.
the Work), am personally satisfied that
Rule 137 For purpose of approval and sanctions, a the work has been executed as per the
group of works which forms one project, specifications laid down in the
shall be considered as one work. The Contract Agreement and the
necessity for obtaining approval or workmanship is up to the standards
sanction of higher authority to a project followed in the Industry.”
which consists of such a group of work
Rule 140 For original/minor works and repair works
should not be avoided because of the fact
entrusted as per Rule 133(2) or Rule
that the cost of each particular work in the
133(3), the Administrative Approval and
project is within the powers of such
Expenditure Sanction shall be accorded
approval or sanction of a lower authority.
and funds allotted by the concerned
This provision, however, shall not apply in
authority under these rules and in
case of works of similar nature which are
accordance with the Delegation of
independent of each other.
Financial Power Rules. The Public Works
Rule 138 Any anticipated or actual savings from a Organisation or the Public Sector
sanctioned estimate for a definite project, Undertaking or any Organisation allotted
shall not, without special authority, be
39
Chapter – 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
work shall then execute the work entrusted
to it in accordance with the rules and
procedures prescribed in that
organisation. A Memorandum of
Understanding (MoU) may be drawn with
Public Works Organisation or the Public
Sector Undertaking for proper execution
of work.
Rule 141 Review of Projects. After a project costing
Rs. 100 crore or above is approved, the
Administrative Ministry or Department will
set up a Review Committee consisting of a
representative each from the
Administrative Ministry, Finance (Internal
Finance Wing) and the Executing Agency
to review the progress of the work. The
Review Committee shall have the powers
to accept variation within 10% of the
approved estimates. For works costing
less than Rs. 100 crore, it will be at the
discretion of the Administrative
Ministry/Department to set up a suitable
mechanism for review and acceptance of
variation within 10% of the approved
estimates.
40
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
PROCUREMENT OF GOODS AND SERVICES
PROCUREMENT OF GOODS b) not indicate a requirement for a
particular trade mark, trade name
Rule 142 This chapter contains the general rules or brand.
applicable to all Ministries or (ii) the specifications in terms of quality,
Departments, regarding procurement of type etc., as also quantity of goods to
goods required for use in the public be procured, should be clearly spelt
service. Detailed instructions relating to out keeping in view the specific needs
procurement of goods may be issued by of the procuring organisations. The
the procuring departments broadly in specifications so worked out should
conformity with the general rules meet the basic needs of the
contained in this Chapter. organisation without including
Rule 143 Definition of Goods. The term ‘goods’ superfluous and non-essential
used in this chapter includes all articles, features, which may result in
material, commodity, livestock, furniture, unwarranted expenditure.
fixtures, raw material, spares, instruments, (iii) Where applicable, the technical
machinery, equipment, industrial plant, specifications shall, to the extent
vehicles, aircraft, ships, medicines, practicable, be based on the national
railway rolling stock, assemblies, sub- technical regulations or recognized
assemblies, accessories, a group of national standards or building codes,
machineries comprising of an integrated wherever such standards exist, and in
production process or such other category their absence, be based on the
of goods or intangible products like relevant international standards. In
software, technology transfer, licenses, case of Government of India funded
patents or other intellectual properties projects abroad, the technical
purchased or otherwise acquired for the specifications may be framed based
use of Government but excludes books, on requirements and standards of the
publications, periodicals, etc. for a library. host beneficiary Government, where
The term ‘goods’ also includes works and such standards exist.
services which are incidental or Provided that a procuring entity may,
consequential to the supply of such goods, for reasons to be recorded in writing,
such as, transportation, insurance, adopt any other technical
installation, commissioning, training and specification.
maintenance.
(iv) Care should also be taken to avoid
Rule 144 Fundamental principles of public purchasing quantities in excess of
buying (for all procurements including requirement to avoid inventory
procurement of works). Every authority carrying costs.
delegated with the financial powers of
(v) offers should be invited following a
procuring goods in public interest shall
fair, transparent and reasonable
have the responsibility and accountability
procedure.
to bring efficiency, economy, and
(vi) the procuring authority should be
transparency in matters relating to public
satisfied that the selected offer
procurement and for fair and equitable
adequately meets the requirement in
treatment of suppliers and promotion of
all respects.
competition in public procurement.
(vii) the procuring authority should satisfy
The procedure to be followed in making
itself that the price of the selected offer
public procurement must conform to the
is reasonable and consistent with the
following yardsticks :-
quality required.
(i) The description of the subject matter
(viii) at each stage of procurement the
of procurement to the extent
concerned procuring authority must
practicable should -
place on record, in precise terms, the
a) be objective, functional, generic
considerations which weighed with it
and measurable and specify
while taking the procurement
technical, qualitative and
decision.
performance characteristics.
(ix) a complete schedule of procurement
41
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
cycle from date of issuing the tender to items to be procured through GeM for the
date of issuing the contract should be prospective suppliers. The Procurement of
published when the tender is issued. Goods and Services by Ministries or
(x) All Ministries/Departments shall Departments will be mandatory for Goods
prepare Annual Procurement Plan or Services available on GeM. The
before the commencement of the year credentials of suppliers on GeM shall be
and the same should also be placed certified by DGS&D. The procuring
on their website. authorities will certify the reasonability of
rates. The GeM portal shall be utilized by
Rule 145 Authorities competent to purchase
the Government buyers for direct on-line
goods. An authority which is competent
purchases as under :-
to incur expenditure may sanction the
purchase of goods required for use in (i) Up to Rs.50,000/- through any of the
public service in accordance with available suppliers on the GeM,
provisions in the Delegation of Financial meeting the requisite quality,
Powers Rules, following the general specification and delivery period.
procedure contained in the following (ii) Above Rs.50,000/- and up to
rules. Rs.30,00,000/- through the GeM
Rule 146 Procurement of goods required on Seller having lowest price amongst the
mobilisation Procurement of goods available sellers, of at least three
required on mobilisation and/ or during different manufacturers, on GeM,
the continuance of Military operations meeting the requisite quality,
shall be regulated by special rules and specification and delivery period. The
orders issued by the Government on this tools for online bidding and online
behalf from time to time. reverse auction available on GeM can
be used by the Buyer if decided by the
Rule 147 Powers for procurement of goods. The
competent authority.
Ministries or Departments have been
delegated full powers to make their own (iii) Above Rs.30,00,000/- through the
arrangements for procurement of goods. supplier having lowest price meeting
In case, however, a Ministry or Department the requisite quality, specification and
does not have the required expertise, it delivery period after mandatorily
may project its indent to the Central obtaining bids, using online bidding
Purchase Organisation (e.g. DGS&D) with or reverse auction tool provided on
the approval of competent authority. The GeM.
indent form to be utilised for this purpose (iv) The invitation for the online e-
will be as per the standard form evolved by bidding/reverse auction will be
the Central Purchase Organisation available to all the existing Sellers or
Rule 148 Rate Contract. DGS&D shall conclude other Sellers registered on the portal
rate contracts with the registered suppliers and who have offered their
for such goods, which are not available on goods/services under the particular
GeM, and are identified as common use product/service category, as per terms
items and are needed on recurring basis and conditions of GeM.
by various Central Government Ministries (v) The above mentioned monetary
or Departments. DGS&D will furnish and ceiling is applicable only for purchases
update all the relevant details of the rate made through GeM. For purchases, if
contracts on its website. The Ministries or any, outside GeM, relevant GFR Rules
Departments shall follow those rate shall apply.
contracts to the maximum extent possible. (vi) The Ministries/Departments shall work
Rule 149. Government e-Market place (GeM). out their procurement requirements of
DGS&D or any other agency authorized by Goods and Services on either “OPEX”
the Government will host an online model or “CAPEX” model as per their
Government e-Marketplace (GeM) for requirement/ suitability at the time of
common use Goods and Services. preparation of Budget Estimates (BE)
DGS&D will ensure adequate publicity and shall project their Annual
including periodic advertisement of the Procurement Plan of goods and
42
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
services on GeM portal within 30 days supplier(s) willing to continue with
of Budget approval. registration are to apply afresh for
(vii) The Government Buyers may renewal of registration. New
ascertain the reasonableness of prices supplier(s) may also be considered for
before placement of order using the registration at any time, provided they
Business Analytics (BA) tools available fulfil all the required conditions.
on GeM including the Last Purchase (iv) Performance and conduct of every
Price on GeM, Department’s own Last registered supplier is to be watched by
Purchase Price etc. the concerned Ministry or Department.
(viii)A demand for goods shall not be The registered supplier(s) are liable to
divided into small quantities to make be removed from the list of approved
piecemeal purchases to avoid suppliers if they fail to abide by the
procurement through L-1 Buying / terms and conditions of the
bidding / reverse auction on GeM or registration or fail to supply the goods
the necessity of obtaining the sanction on time or supply substandard goods
of higher authorities required with or make any false declaration to any
reference to the estimated value of the Government agency or for any ground
total demand. which, in the opinion of the
Government, is not in public interest.
Rule 150 Registration of Suppliers
(v) The list of registered suppliers for the
(i) With a view to establishing reliable
subject matter of procurement be
sources for procurement of goods
exhibited on the Central Public
commonly required for Government
Procurement Portal and websites of the
use, the Central Purchase
Procuring Entity/ e-Procurement/
Organisation (e.g. DGS&D) will
portals.
prepare and maintain item-wise lists
of eligible and capable suppliers. Rule 151 Debarment from bidding.
Such approved suppliers will be (i) A bidder shall be debarred if he has
known as “Registered Suppliers”. All been convicted of an offence—
Ministries or Departments may utilise (a) under the Prevention of
these lists as and when necessary. Corruption Act, 1988; or
Such registered suppliers are prima
(b) the Indian Penal Code or any
facie eligible for consideration for
other law for the time being in
procurement of goods through
force, for causing any loss of life or
Limited Tender Enquiry. They are also
property or causing a threat to
ordinarily exempted from furnishing
public health as part of execution
bid security along with their bids. A
of a public procurement contract.
Head of Department may also register
(ii) A bidder debarred under sub-section
suppliers of goods which are
(i) or any successor of the bidder shall
specifically required by that
not be eligible to participate in a
Department or Office, periodically.
procurement process of any procuring
Registration of the supplier should be
entity for a period not exceeding three
done following a fair, transparent and
years commencing from the date of
reasonable procedure and after
debarment. Department of
giving due publicity.
Commerce (DGS&D) will maintain
(ii) Credentials, manufacturing
such list which will also be displayed
capability, quality control systems,
on the website of DGS&D as well as
past performance, after-sales service,
Central Public Procurement Portal.
financial background etc. of the
(iii) A procuring entity may debar a bidder
supplier(s) should be carefully verified
or any of its successors, from
before registration.
participating in any procurement
(iii) The supplier(s) will be registered for a
process undertaken by it, for a period
fixed period (between 1 to 3 years)
not exceeding two years, if it
depending on the nature of the goods.
determines that the bidder has
At the end of this period, the registered
breached the code of integrity. The
43
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Ministry/Department will maintain “I,, am personally satisfied that these
such list which will also be displayed goods purchased are of the requisite
on their website. quality and specification and have been
purchased from a reliable supplier at a
(iv) The bidder shall not be debarred
reasonable price.”
unless such bidder has been given a
reasonable opportunity to represent Rule 155 Purchase of goods by Purchase
against such debarment Committee. Purchase of goods costing
above Rs. 25,000 (Rupees twenty five
Rule 152 Enlistment of Indian Agents. As per the
thousand only) and upto Rs.2,50,000/-
Compulsory Enlistment Scheme of the
(Rupees two lakh and fifty thousand only)
Department of Expenditure, Ministry of
on each occasion may be made on the
Finance, it is compulsory for Indian
recommendations of a duly constituted
agents, who desire to quote directly on
Local Purchase Committee consisting of
behalf of their foreign principals, to get
three members of an appropriate level as
themselves enlisted with the Central
decided by the Head of the Department.
Purchase Organisation (eg. DGS&D).
The committee will survey the market to
However, such enlistment is not equivalent
ascertain the reasonableness of rate,
to registration of suppliers as mentioned
quality and specifications and identify the
under Rule 150.
appropriate supplier. Before
Rule 153 Reserved Items and other
recommending placement of the purchase
Purchase/Price Preference Policy.
order, the members of the committee will
(i) The Central Government, through jointly record a certificate as under.
administrative instructions, has
“Certified that we, members of the
reserved all items of hand spun and
purchase committee are jointly and
hand-woven textiles (khadi goods) for
individually satisfied that the goods
exclusive purchase from Khadi Village
recommended for purchase are of the
Industries Commission (KVIC). It has
requisite specification and quality, priced
also reserved all items of handloom
at the prevailing market rate and the
textiles required by Central
supplier recommended is reliable and
Government departments for
competent to supply the goods in
exclusive purchase from KVIC and/or
question, and it is not debarred by
the notified handloom units of
Department of Commerce or Ministry/
Association of Corporations and Apex
Department concerned.”
Societies of Handlooms (ACASH).
Rule 156 (1) Purchase of goods directly under
(ii) Ministry of Micro, Small and Medium
Rate Contract. In case a Ministry or
Enterprises (MSME) have notified
Department directly procures Central
procurement policy under section 11
Purchase Organisation (e.g. DGS&D) rate
of the Micro, Small and Medium
contracted goods from suppliers, the
Enterprises Development Act, 2006.
prices to be paid for such goods shall not
(iii) The Central Government may, by exceed those stipulated in the rate contract
notification, provide for mandatory and the other salient terms and conditions
procurement of any goods or services of the purchase should be in line with those
from any category of bidders, or specified in the Rate Contract. The Ministry
provide for preference to bidders on or Department shall make its own
the grounds of promotion of locally arrangement for inspection and testing of
manufactured goods or locally such goods where ever required.
provided services.
Rule 156 (2) The Central Purchase Organisation
Rule 154 Purchase of goods without quotation (e.g. DGS&D) should host the
Purchase of goods upto the value of specifications, prices and other salient
Rs. 25,000 (Rupees twenty five thousand) details of different rate contracted items,
only on each occasion may be made appropriately updated, on the web site for
without inviting quotations or bids on the use by the procuring Ministry or
basis of a certificate to be recorded by the Department.
competent authority in the following Rule 157 A demand for goods should not be divided
format.
44
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
into small quantities to make piecemeal inviting bids or proposals in any form
purchases to avoid the necessity of whether they are advertised, issued to
obtaining the sanction of higher authority limited number of parties or to a single
required with reference to the estimated party.
value of the total demand. (iv) In the case of procurements made
Rule 158 Purchase of goods by obtaining bids. though DGS&D Rate Contracts or
Except in cases covered under Rule through any other Central
154,155, and 156(1), Ministries or Procurement Organizations (CPOs)
Departments shall procure goods under only award details need to be
the powers referred to in Rule 147 above published.
by following the standard method of (v) These instructions would not apply to
obtaining bids in : procurements made in terms of
(i) Advertised Tender Enquiry provisions of Rules 154 (Purchase of
(ii) Limited Tender Enquiry goods without quotations) or 155
(Purchase of goods by purchase
(iii) Two-Stage Bidding
committee) of General Financial
(iv) Single Tender Enquiry
Rules.
(v) Electronic Reverse Auctions
Rule 160 E-Procurement
Rule 159 E-Publishing
(i) It is mandatory for Ministries/
(i) It is mandatory for all Ministries/ Departments to receive all bids
Departments of the Central through e-procurement portals in
Government, their attached and respect of all procurements.
Subordinate Offices and Autonomous
(ii) Ministries/ Departments which do not
/Statutory Bodies to publish their
have a large volume of procurement
tender enquiries, corrigenda thereon
or carry out procurements required
and details of bid awards on the
only for day-to-day running of offices
Central Public Procurement Portal
and also have not initiated
(CPPP).
e-procurement through any other
(ii) Individual cases where confidentiality solution provided so far, may use
is required, for reasons of national e-procurement solution developed by
security, would be exempted from the NIC. Other Ministries/ Departments
mandatory e-publishing requirement. may either use e-procurement
The decision to exempt any case on solution developed by NIC or engage
the said grounds should be approved any other service provider following
by the Secretary of the Ministry/ due process.
Department with the concurrence of
(iii) These instructions will not apply to
the concerned Financial Advisor. In
procurements made by Ministries /
the case of Autonomous Bodies and
Departments through DGS&D Rate
Statutory Bodies’ approval of the
Contracts.
Head of the Body with the
(iv) In individual case where national
concurrence of the Head of the
security and strategic considerations
Finance should be obtained in each
demands confidentiality, Ministries/
such case. Statistical information on
Departments may exempt such cases
the number of cases in which
from e-procurement after seeking
exemption was granted and the value
approval of concerned Secretary and
of the concerned contract should be
with concurrence of Financial
intimated on a Quarterly basis to the
Advisers.
Ministry of Finance, Department of
Expenditure. (v) In case of tenders floated by Indian
Missions Abroad, Competent
(iii) The above instructions apply to all
Authority to decide the tender, may
Tender Enquiries, Requests for
exempt such case from e-
Proposals, Requests for Expressions of
procurement.
Interest, Notice for pre Qualification/
Registration or any other notice Rule 161 Advertised Tender Enquiry
(I) Subject to exceptions incorporated
45
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
under Rule154, 155,162 Rule 162 Limited Tender Enquiry
and166,invitation to tenders by (i) This method may be adopted when
advertisement should be used for estimated value of the goods to be
procurement of goods of estimated procured is up to Rupees Twenty five
value of Rs. 25 lakhs (Rupees Twenty Lakhs. Copies of the bidding
Five Lakh)and above. Advertisement document should be sent directly by
in such cases should be given on speed post/registered post/courier/ e-
Central Public Procurement Portal mail to firms which are borne on the
(CPPP) at www.eprocure.gov.in and list of registered suppliers for the
on GeM. An organisation having its goods in question as referred under
own website should also publish all its Rule 150 above. The number of
advertised tender enquiries on the supplier firms in Limited Tender
website. Enquiry should be more than three.
(ii) The organisation should also post the Efforts should be made to identify a
complete bidding document in its higher number of approved suppliers
website and on CPPP to enable to obtain more responsive bids on
prospective bidders to make use of the competitive basis.
document by downloading from the Further, an organisation should
web site. publish its limited tender enquiries on
(iii) The advertisements for invitation of Central Public Procurement Portal
tenders should give the complete web (CPPP) as per Rule 159. Apart from
address from where the bidding CPPP, the organisations should publish
documents can be downloaded. the tender enquiries on the
(iv) In order to promote wider Department’s or Ministry’s web site.
participation and ease of bidding, no (ii) The unsolicited bids should not be
cost of tender document may be accepted. However Ministries/
charged for the tender documents Departments should evolve a system
downloaded by the bidders. by which interested firms can register
(iv) Where the Ministry or Department and bid in next round of tendering.
feels that the goods of the required (iii) Purchase through Limited Tender
quality, specifications etc., may not be Enquiry may be adopted even where
available in the country and it is the estimated value of the
necessary to also look for suitable procurement is more than Rupees
competitive offers from abroad, the twenty-five Lakhs, in the following
Ministry or Department may send circumstances.
copies of the tender notice to the (a) The competent authority in the
Indian Embassies abroad as well as to Ministry or Department certifies
the foreign Embassies in India. The that the demand is urgent and any
selection of the embassies will depend additional expenditure involved by
on the possibility of availability of the not procuring through advertised
required goods in such countries. In tender enquiry is justified in view of
such cases e-procurement as per Rule urgency. The Ministry or
160 may not be insisted. Department should also put on
(v) Ordinarily, the minimum time to be record the nature of the urgency
allowed for submission of bids should and reasons why the procurement
be three weeks from the date of could not be anticipated.
publication of the tender notice or (b) There are sufficient reasons, to be
availability of the bidding document recorded in writing by the
for sale, whichever is later. Where the competent authority, indicating
Department also contemplates that it will not be in public interest
obtaining bids from abroad, the to procure the goods through
minimum period should be kept as advertised tender enquiry.
four weeks for both domestic and
(c) The sources of supply are
foreign bidders.
definitely known and possibility of
46
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
fresh source(s) beyond those study or development, except
being tapped is remote. where the contract includes the
(iv) Sufficient time should be allowed for production of items in quantities
submission of bids in Limited Tender sufficient to establish their
Enquiry cases. commercial viability or to recover
research and development
Rule 163 Two bid system (simultaneous receipt
costs; or
of separate technical and financial
bids) : For purchasing high value plant, (d) The bidder is expected to carry out
machinery etc. of a complex and technical a detailed survey or investigation
nature, bids may be obtained in two parts and undertake a comprehensive
as under : assessment of risks, costs and
obligations associated with the
(i) Technical bid consisting of all
particular procurement.
technical details along with
commercial terms and conditions; (ii) The procedure for two stage bidding
and shall include the following, namely:—
(ii) Financial bid indicating item-wise (a) in the first stage of the bidding
price for the items mentioned in the process, the Ministry/Department
technical bid. shall invite bids through
advertised tender containing the
The technical bid and the financial bid
technical aspects and contractual
should be sealed by the bidder in separate
terms and conditions of the
covers duly super-scribed and both these
proposed procurement without a
sealed covers are to be put in a bigger
bid price;
cover which should also be sealed and
duly super-scribed. The technical bids are (b) all first stage bids, which are
to be opened by the purchasing Ministry or otherwise eligible, shall be
Department at the first instance and evaluated through an
evaluated by a competent committee or appropriate committee
authority. At the second stage financial constituted by the Ministry/
bids of only these technically acceptable Department;
offers should be opened after intimating (c) the committee may hold
them the date and time of opening the discussions with the bidders and if
financial bid for further evaluation and any such discussion is held, equal
ranking before awarding the contract. opportunity shall be given to all
Rule 164 Two-Stage Bidding (Obtain bids in two bidders to participate in the
stages with receipt of financial bids after discussions;
receipt and evaluation of technical bids) (d) in revising the relevant terms and
(i) Ministry/Department may procure conditions of the procurement,
the subject matter of procurement by the procuring entity shall not
the method of two-stage bidding, if modify the fundamental nature of
the procurement itself, but may
(a) it is not feasible to formulate
add, amend or omit any
detailed specifications or identify
specification of the subject matter
specific characteristics for the
of procurement or criterion for
subject matter of procurement,
evaluation;
without receiving inputs
regarding its technical aspects (e) in the second stage of the bidding
from bidders; or process, the procuring entity shall
invite bids from all those bidders
(b) the character of the subject matter
whose bids at the first stage were
of procurement is subject to rapid
not rejected, to present final bid
technological advances or market
with bid prices in response to a
fluctuations or both; or
revised set of terms and
(c) Ministry/Department seeks to
conditions of the procurement;
enter into a contract for the
(f) any bidder, invited to bid but not in
purpose of research, experiment,
a position to supply the subject
47
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
matter of procurement due to
modification in the specifications
(Signature with date and designation
or terms and conditions, may
withdraw from the bidding of the indenting officer)
proceedings without forfeiting Rule 167 Electronic Reverse Auction
any bid security that he may have
(i) Electronic Reverse Auction means an
been required to provide or being
online real-time purchasing technique
penalised in any way, by
utilised by the procuring entity to select
declaring his intention to
the successful bid, which involves
withdraw from the procurement
presentation by bidders of successively
proceedings with adequate
more favourable bids during a
justification.
scheduled period of time and
Rule 165 Late Bids. In the case of advertised tender automatic evaluation of bids;
enquiry or limited tender enquiry, late bids
(ii) A procuring entity may choose to
(i.e. bids received after the specified date
procure a subject matter of
and time for receipt of bids) should not be
procurement by the electronic reverse
considered.
auction method, if:
Rule 166 Single Tender Enquiry. Procurement
(a) It is feasible for the procuring
from a single source may be resorted to in
entity to formulate a detailed
the following circumstances :
description of the subject matter of
(i) It is in the knowledge of the user the procurement;
department that only a particular firm
(b) There is a competitive market of
is the manufacturer of the required
bidders anticipated to be qualified
goods
to participate in the electronic
(ii) In a case of emergency, the required reverse auction, so that effective
goods are necessarily to be competition is ensured;
purchased from a particular source
(c) The criteria to be used by the
and the reason for such decision is to
procuring entity in determining the
be recorded and approval of
successful bid are quantifiable
competent authority obtained.
and can be expressed in monetary
(iii) For standardisation of machinery or terms; and
spare parts to be compatible to the
(iii) The procedure for electronic reverse
existing sets of equipment (on the
auction shall include the following,
advice of a competent technical
namely:
expert and approved by the
(a) The procuring entity shall solicit
competent authority), the required
bids through an invitation to the
item is to be purchased only from a
electronic reverse auction to be
selected firm
published or communicated in
Note : Proprietary Article Certificate in the
accordance with the provisions
following form is to be provided by the
similar to e-procurement; and
Ministry/Department before procuring the
(b) The invitation shall, in addition to
goods from a single source under the
the information as specified in
provision of sub Rule 166 (i) and 166 (iii)
e-procurement, include details
as applicable.
relating to access to and
(i) The indented goods are
registration for the auction,
manufactured by M/s.......................
opening and closing of the
(ii) No other make or model is acceptable auction and Norms for conduct of
for the following reasons : the auction.
......................................................
Rule 168 Contents of Bidding Document
(iii) Concurrence of finance wing to the
All the terms, conditions, stipulations and
proposal vide: ………………..
information to be incorporated in the
(iv) Approval of the competent authority bidding document are to be shown in the
vide: appropriate chapters as below :-
Chapter – 1: Instructions to Bidders.
48
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Chapter – 2: Conditions of Contract. Draft, Fixed Deposit Receipt, Banker’s
Chapter – 3: Schedule of Requirements. Cheque or Bank Guarantee from any
of the Commercial Banks or payment
Chapter – 4: Specifications and allied
online in an acceptable form,
Technical Details.
safeguarding the purchaser’s interest
Chapter – 5: Price Schedule (to be
in all respects. The bid security is
utilised by the bidders
normally to remain valid for a period
for quoting their prices).
of forty-five days beyond the final bid
Chapter – 6: Contract Form. validity period.
Chapter – 7: Other Standard Forms, if (ii) Bid securities of the unsuccessful
any, to be utilised by the bidders should be returned to them at
purchaser and the bidders. the earliest after expiry of the final bid
Rule 169 Maintenance Contract. Depending on validity and latest on or before the 30th
the cost and nature of the goods to be day after the award of the contract.
purchased, it may also be necessary to (iii) In place of a Bid security, the
enter into maintenance contract(s) of Ministries/ Departments may require
suitable period either with the supplier of Bidders to sign a Bid securing
the goods or with any other competent declaration accepting that if they
firm, not necessarily the supplier of the withdraw or modify their Bids during
subject goods. Such maintenance the period of validity, or if they are
contracts are especially needed for awarded the contract and they fail to
sophisticated and costly equipment and sign the contract, or to submit a
machinery. It may, however, be kept in performance security before the
mind that the equipment or machinery is deadline defined in the request for
maintained free of charge by the supplier bids document, they will be suspended
during its warranty period or such other for the period of time specified in the
extended periods as the contract terms request for bids document from being
may provide and the paid maintenance eligible to submit Bids for contracts
should commence only thereafter. with the entity that invited the Bids.
Rule 170 Bid Security Rule 171 Performance Security
(i) To safeguard against a bidder’s (i) To ensure due performance of the
withdrawing or altering its bid during contract, Performance Security is to be
the bid validity period in the case of obtained from the successful bidder
advertised or limited tender enquiry, awarded the contract. Unlike contracts
Bid Security (also known as Earnest of Works and Plants, in case of
Money) is to be obtained from the contracts for goods, the need for the
bidders except Micro and Small Performance Security depends on the
Enterprises (MSEs) as defined in MSE market conditions and commercial
Procurement Policy issued by practice for the particular kind of
Department of Micro, Small and goods. Performance Security should
Medium Enterprises (MSME) or are be for an amount of five to ten per
registered with the Central Purchase cent. of the value of the contract as
Organisation or the concerned specified in the bid documents.
Ministry or Department. The bidders Performance Security may be
should be asked to furnish bid security furnished in the form of an Account
along with their bids. Amount of bid Payee Demand Draft, Fixed Deposit
security should ordinarily range Receipt from a Commercial bank,
between two percent to five percent of Bank Guarantee from a Commercial
the estimated value of the goods to be bank or online payment in an
procured. The amount of bid security acceptable form safeguarding the
should be determined accordingly by purchaser’s interest in all respects.
the Ministry or Department and
(ii) Performance Security should remain
indicated in the bidding documents.
valid for a period of sixty days beyond
The bid security may be accepted in
the date of completion of all
the form of Account Payee Demand
49
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
purchases should be made in a
contractual obligations of the supplier
transparent, competitive and fair manner,
including warranty obligations.
to secure best value for money. This will
(iii) Bid security should be refunded to the
also enable the prospective bidders to
successful bidder on receipt of
formulate and send their competitive bids
Performance Security.
with confidence. Some of the measures for
Rule 172 (1) Advance payment to supplier ensuring the above are as follows:-
Ordinarily, payments for services rendered (i) the text of the bidding document
or supplies made should be released only should be self-contained and
after the services have been rendered or comprehensive without any
supplies made. However, it may become ambiguities. All essential
necessary to make advance payments for information, which a bidder needs
example in the following types of cases :- for sending responsive bid, should
(i) Advance payment demanded by firms be clearly spelt out in the bidding
holding maintenance contracts for document in simple language. The
servicing of Air-conditioners, condition of prior turnover and prior
computers, other costly equipment, experience may be relaxed for
etc. Startups (as defined by Department
(ii) Advance payment demanded by firms of Industrial Policy and Promotion)
against fabrication contracts, turn-key subject to meeting of quality &
contracts etc. technical specifications and making
suitable provisions in the bidding
Such advance payments should not
document. The bidding document
exceed the following limits :
should contain, inter alia.
(a) Thirty per cent. of the contract
(a) Description and Specifications
value to private firms;
of goods including the nature,
(b) Forty per cent. of the contract
quantity, time and place or
value to a State or Central
places of delivery.
Government agency or a Public
(b) the criteria for eligibility and
Sector Undertaking; or
qualifications to be met by the
(c) in case of maintenance contract,
bidders such as minimum level
the amount should not exceed the
of experience, past
amount payable for six months
performance, technical
under the contract.
capability, manufacturing
Ministries or Departments of the facilities and financial position
Central Government may relax, etc or limitation for
in consultation with their participation of the bidders, if
Financial Advisers concerned, the any.
ceilings (including percentage
(c) eligibility criteria for goods
laid down for advance payment
indicating any legal restrictions
for private firms) mentioned
or conditions about the origin of
above. While making any
goods etc which may required
advance payment as above,
to be met by the successful
adequate safeguards in the form
bidder.
of bank guarantee etc. should be
(d) the procedure as well as date,
obtained from the firm.
time and place for sending the
Rule 172 (2) Part payment to suppliers:
bids.
Depending on the terms of delivery
(e) date, time and place of
incorporated in a contract, part payment
opening of the bid.
to the supplier may be released after it
dispatches the goods from its premises in (e) Criteria for evaluation of bids
terms of the contract. (f) special terms affecting
Rule 173 Transparency, competition, fairness performance, if any.
and elimination of arbitrariness in the (g) Essential terms of the
procurement process All government procurement contract
50
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(h) Bidding Documents should the bidding document to enable a
include a clause that “if a firm bidder to question the bidding
quotes NIL charges/ conditions, bidding process and/ or
consideration, the bid shall be rejection of its bid. The reasons for
treated as unresponsive and rejecting a tender or non-issuing a
will not be considered”. tender document to a prospective
(ii) Any other information which the bidder must be disclosed where
procuring entity considers necessary enquiries are made by the bidder.
for the bidders to submit their bids. (v) Suitable provision for settlement of
(iii) Modification to bidding document: disputes, if any, emanating from the
resultant contract, should be kept in
(a) In case any modification is
the bidding document.
made to the bidding document
or any clarification is issued (vi) The bidding document should
which materially affects the indicate clearly that the resultant
terms contained in the bidding contract will be interpreted under
document, the procuring entity Indian Laws.
shall publish or communicate (vii) The bidders should be given
such modification or reasonable time to prepare and
clarification in the same send their bids.
manner as the publication or (viii) The bids should be opened in public
communication of the initial and authorised representatives of
bidding document was made. the bidders should be permitted to
(b) In case a clarification or attend the bid opening.
modification is issued to the (ix) The specifications of the required
bidding document, the goods should be clearly stated
procuring entity shall, before without any ambiguity so that the
the last date for submission of prospective bidders can send
bids, extend such time limit, if, meaningful bids. In order to attract
in its opinion more time is sufficient number of bidders, the
required by bidders to take into specification should be broad based
account the clarification or to the extent feasible
modification, as the case may
(x) Pre-bid conference: In case of turn-
be, while submitting their bids.
key contract(s) or contract(s) of
(c) Any bidder who has submitted special nature for procurement of
his bid in response to the sophisticated and costly equipment
original invitation shall have or wherever felt necessary, a suitable
the opportunity to modify or re- provision is to be kept in the bidding
submit it, as the case may be, documents for one or more rounds
or withdraw such bid in case of pre-bid conference for clarifying
the modification to bidding issues and clearing doubts, if any,
document materially affect the about the specifications and other
essential terms of the allied technical details of the plant,
procurement, within the period equipment and machinery etc.
initially allotted or such projected in the bidding document.
extended time as may be The date, time and place of pre-bid
allowed for submission of bids, conference should be indicated in
after the modifications are the bidding document. This date
made to the bidding document should be sufficiently ahead of bid
by the procuring entity: opening date. The records of such
Provided that the bid last conference shall be intimated to all
submitted or the bid as bidders and, shall also be exhibited
modified by the bidder shall be on the website(s) where tender was
considered for evaluation published.
(iv) Suitable provision should be kept in (xi) Criteria for determining
51
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
responsiveness are to be taken into lowest acceptable bidder against
account for evaluating the bids such ad-hoc requirement is not in a
as: position to supply the full quantity
(a) time of delivery. required, the remaining quantity, as
far as possible, be ordered from the
(b) Performance/ efficiency/
next higher responsive bidder at the
environmental characteristics.
rates offered by the lowest
(c) the terms of payment and of
responsive bidder.
guarantees in respect of the
(xvii) Procurement of Energy Efficient
subject matter of procurement
Electrical Appliances: Ministries/
(d) price.
Departments while procuring
(e) cost of operating, maintaining electrical appliances notified by
and repairing etc. Department of Expenditure shall
(xii) Bids received should be evaluated in ensure that they carry the notified
terms of the conditions already threshold or higher Star Rating of
incorporated in the bidding Bureau of Energy Efficiency (BEE).
documents; No new condition which (xviii) The name of the successful bidder
was not incorporated in the bidding awarded the contract should be
documents should be brought in for mentioned in the CPPP, Ministries or
evaluation of the bids. Departments website and their
Determination of a bid’s notice board or bulletin.
responsiveness should be based on
(xix) Rejection of all Bids is justified when
the contents of the bid itself without
a. effective competition is lacking.
recourse to extrinsic evidence.
b. all Bids and Proposals are not
(xiii) Bidders should not be permitted to
substantially responsive to the
alter or modify their bids after expiry
requirements of the
of the deadline for receipt of bids.
Procurement Documents.
(xiv) Negotiation with bidders after bid
c. the Bids’/Proposals’ prices are
opening must be severely
substantially higher that the
discouraged. However, in
updated cost estimate or
exceptional circumstances where
available budget; or
price negotiation against an ad-hoc
procurement is necessary due to d. none of the technical Proposals
some unavoidable circumstances, meets the minimum technical
the same may be resorted to only qualifying score.
with the lowest evaluated responsive (xx) Lack of competition in rule 173(xix)
bidder. shall not be determined solely on the
(xv) In the Rate Contract system, where a basis of the number of Bidders. Even
number of firms are brought on Rate when only one Bid is submitted, the
Contract for the same item, process may be considered valid
negotiation as well as counter provided following conditions are
offering of rates are permitted to the satisfied:
bidders and for this purpose special a. the procurement was
permission has been given to the satisfactorily advertised and
Directorate General of Supplies and sufficient time was given for
Disposals (DGS&D). submission of bids.
(xvi) Contract should ordinarily be b. the qualification criteria were
awarded to the lowest evaluated not unduly restrictive; and
bidder whose bid has been found to c. prices are reasonable in
be responsive and who is eligible comparison to market values
and qualified to perform the
(xxi) When a limited or open tender
contract satisfactorily as per the
results in only one effective offer, it
terms and conditions incorporated
shall be treated as a single tender
in the corresponding bidding
contract.
document. However, where the
52
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(xxii) In case a purchase Committee is otherwise influence the
constituted to purchase or procurement process.
recommend the procurement, no (b) a n y o m i s s i o n , o r
member of the purchase Committee misrepresentation that may
should be reporting directly to any mislead or attempt to mislead so
other member of such Committee in that financial or other benefit may
case estimated value of be obtained or an obligation
procurement exceeds Rs. 25 lakhs. avoided.
Rule 174 Efficiency, Economy and Accountability (c) any collusion, bid rigging or anti-
in Public Procurement System. Public competitive behavior that may
procurement procedure should ensure impair the transparency, fairness
efficiency, economy and accountability in and the progress of the
the system. To achieve the same, the procurement process.
following keys areas should be addressed
(d) improper use of information
:
provided by the procuring entity
(i) To reduce delay, appropriate time to the bidder with an intent to
frame for each stage of procurement gain unfair advantage in the
should be prescribed by the Ministry procurement process or for
or Department. personal gain.
(ii) To minimise the time needed for (e) any financial or business
decision making and placement of transactions between the bidder
contract, every Ministry/Department, and any official of the procuring
with the approval of the competent entity related to tender or
authority, may delegate, wherever execution process of contract;
necessary, appropriate purchasing which can affect the decision of
powers to the lower functionaries. the procuring entity directly or
(iii) The Ministries or Departments should indirectly.
ensure placement of contract within (f) any coercion or any threat to
the original validity of the bids. impair or harm, directly or
Extension of bid validity must be indirectly, any party or its property
discouraged and resorted to only in to influence the procurement
exceptional circumstances. process.
(iv) The Central Purchase Organisation (g) obstruction of any investigation or
(e.g. DGS&D) should bring into the auditing of a procurement
Rate Contract system more and more process.
common user items which are
(h) making false declaration or
frequently needed in bulk by various
providing false information for
Central Government Departments.
participation in a tender process
The Central Purchase Organisation
or to secure a contract;
(e.g. DGS&D) should also ensure that
(ii) disclosure of conflict of interest.
the Rate Contracts remain available
without any break. (iii) Disclosure by the bidder of any
previous transgressions made in
Rule 175 (1) Code of Integrity
respect of the provisions of sub-clause
No official of a procuring entity or a
(i) with any entity in any country during
bidder shall act in contravention of
the last three years or of being
the codes which includes
debarred by any other procuring
(i) prohibition of entity.
(a) making offer, solicitation or Rule 175 (2) The procuring entity, after giving a
acceptance of bribe, reward or reasonable opportunity of being heard,
gift or any material benefit, either comes to the conclusion that a bidder or
directly or indirectly, in exchange prospective bidder, as the case may be,
for an unfair advantage in the has contravened the code of integrity, may
procurement process or to take appropriate measures.
53
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Rule 176 Buy-Back Offer Rule 179 This chapter contains the fundamental
When it is decided with the approval of the principles applicable to all Ministries or
competent authority to replace an existing Departments regarding engagement of
old item(s) with a new and better version, consultant(s). Detailed instructions to this
the department may trade the existing old effect may be issued by the concerned
item while purchasing the new one. For Ministries or Departments. However, the
this purpose, a suitable clause is to be Ministries or Departments shall ensure that
incorporated in the bidding document so they do not contravene the basic rules
that the prospective and interested bidders contained in this chapter.
formulate their bids accordingly. Rule 180 Identification of Services required to be
Depending on the value and condition of performed by Consultants: Engagement
the old item to be traded, the time as well of consultants may be resorted to in
as the mode of handing over the old item situations requiring high quality services
to the successful bidder should be decided for which the concerned Ministry/
and relevant details in this regard suitably Department does not have requisite
incorporated in the bidding document. expertise. Approval of the competent
Further, suitable provision should also be authority should be obtained before
kept in the bidding document to enable the engaging consultant(s).
purchaser either to trade or not to trade the Rule 181 Preparation of scope of the required
item while purchasing the new one. Consultant(s): The Ministries/
Departments should prepare in simple and
PROCUREMENT OF SERVICES concise language the requirement,
objectives and the scope of the
A. CONSULTING SERVICES
assignment. The eligibility and
prequalification criteria to be met by the
Rule 177 "Consulting Service" means any subject consultants should also be clearly
matter of procurement (which as identified at this stage.
distinguished from ‘Non- Consultancy
Rule 182 Estimating reasonable expenditure:
Services’ involves primarily non-physical
Ministry or Department proposing to
project-specific, intellectual and
engage consultant(s) should estimate
procedural processes where outcomes/
reasonable expenditure for the same by
deliverables would vary from one
ascertaining the prevalent market
consultant to another), other than goods
conditions and consulting other
or works, except those incidental or
organisations engaged in similar activities.
consequential to the service, and includes
Rule 183 Identification of likely sources.
professional, intellectual, training and
advisory services or any other service (i) Where the estimated cost of the
classified or declared as such by a consulting service is up to Rupees
procuring entity but does not include direct twenty-five lakhs, preparation of a
engagement of a retired Government long list of potential consultants may
servant. be done on the basis of formal or
informal enquiries from other
Note: These Services typically involve
Ministries or Departments or
providing expert or strategic advice e.g.,
Organisations involved in similar
management consultants, policy
activities, Chambers of Commerce &
consultants, communications consultants,
Industry, Association of consultancy
Advisory and project related Consulting
firms etc.
Services which include, feasibility studies,
project management, engineering (ii) Where the estimated cost of the
services, finance, accounting and taxation consulting services is above Rupees
services, training and development etc. twenty-five lakhs, in addition to(i)
above, an enquiry for seeking
Rule 178 The Ministries or Departments may hire
‘Expression of Interest’ from
external professionals, consultancy firms
consultants should be published on
or consultants (referred to as consultant
Central Public Procurement Portal
hereinafter) for a specific job, which is well
(CPPP) at www.eprocure.gov.in and on
defined in terms of content and time frame
for its completion.
54
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GeM. An organisation having its own (v) List of key position whose CV and
website should also publish all its experience would be evaluated.
advertised tender enquiries on the (vi) Bid evaluation criteria and selection
website. Enquiry for seeking procedure.
Expression of Interest should include
(vii) Standard formats for technical and
in brief, the broad scope of work or
financial proposal.
service, inputs to be provided by the
(viii) Proposed contract terms.
Ministry or Department, eligibility and
the pre-qualification criteria to bemet (ix) Procedure proposed to be followed for
by the consultant(s) and consultant’s midterm review of the progress of the
past experience in similar work or work and review of the final draft
service. The consultants may also be report.
asked to send their comments on the Rule 187 Receipt and opening of proposals
objectives and scope of the work or Proposals should ordinarily be asked for
service projected in the enquiry. from consultants in ‘Two bid’ system with
Adequate time should be allowed for technical and financial bids sealed
getting responses from interested separately. The bidder should put these
consultants. two sealed envelopes in a bigger envelop
Rule 184 Short listing of consultants. On the duly sealed and submit the same to the
basis of responses received from the Ministry or Department by the specified
interested parties as per Rule 183 above, date and time at the specified place. On
consultants meeting the requirements receipt, the technical proposals should be
should be short listed for further opened first by the Ministry or Department
consideration. The number of short listed at the specified date, time and place.
consultants should not be less than three. Rule 188 Late Bids. Late bids i.e. bids received after
Rule 185 Preparation of Terms of Reference the specified date and time of receipt
(TOR). should not be considered.
The TOR should include Rule 189 Evaluation of Technical Bids: Technical
bids should be analysed and evaluated by
(i) Precise statement of objectives.
a Consultancy Evaluation Committee
(ii) Outline of the tasks to be carried out.
(CEC) constituted by the Ministry or
(iii) Schedule for completion of tasks. Department. The CEC shall record in detail
(iv) The support or inputs to be provided the reasons for acceptance or rejection of
by the Ministry or Department to the technical proposals analysed and
facilitate the consultancy. evaluated by it.
(v) The final outputs that will be required Rule 190 Evaluation of Financial Bids of the
of the Consultant. technically qualified bidders: The
Rule 186 Preparation and Issue of Request for Ministry or Department shall open the
Proposal (RFP). RFP is the document to financial bids of only those bidders who
be used by the Ministry/Department for have been declared technically qualified
obtaining offers from the consultants for by the Consultancy Evaluation Committee
the required service. The RFP should be as per Rule 189 above for further analysis
issued to the shortlisted consultants to seek or evaluation and ranking and selecting
their technical and financial proposals. the successful bidder for placement of the
The RFP should contain : consultancy contract.
(i) A letter of Invitation Rule 191 Methods of Selection/ Evaluation of
Consultancy Proposals
(ii) Information to Consultants regarding
the procedure for submission of The basis of selection of the consultant
proposal. shall follow any of the methods given in
Rule 192 to 194 as appropriate for the
(iii) Terms of Reference (TOR).
circumstances in each case.
(iv) Eligibility and pre-qualification
Rule 192. Quality and Cost Based Selection
criteria in case the same has not been
(QCBS):QCBS may be used for
ascertained through Enquiry for
Procurement of consultancy services,
Expression of Interest.
55
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
where quality of consultancy is of prime disasters, situations where timely
concern. completion of the assignment is of
(i) In QCBS initially the quality of utmost importance; and
technical proposals is scored as per (iii) situations where execution of the
criteria announced in the RFP. Only assignment may involve use of
those responsive proposals that have proprietary techniques or only one
achieved at least minimum specified consultant has requisite expertise.
qualifying score in quality of technical (iv) Under some special circumstances, it
proposal are considered further. may become necessary to select a
(ii) After opening and scoring, the particular consultant where adequate
Financial proposals of responsive justification is available for such
technically qualified bidders, a final single-source selection in the context
combined score is arrived at by giving of the overall interest of the Ministry or
predefined relative weight ages for the Department. Full justification for
score of quality of the technical single source selection should be
proposal and the score of financial recorded in the file and approval of
proposal. the competent authority obtained
(iii) The RFP shall specify the minimum before resorting to such single-source
qualifying score for the quality of selection.
technical proposal and also the (v) It shall ensure fairness and equity, and
relative weight ages to be given to the shall have a procedure in place to
quality and cost (determined for each ensure that the prices are reasonable
case depending on the relative and consistent with market rates for
importance of quality vis-a-vis cost tasks of a similar nature; and the
aspects in the assignment, e.g. 70:30, required consultancy services are not
60:40, 50:50 etc). The proposal with split into smaller sized procurement.
the highest weighted combined score Rule 195 Monitoring the Contract. The
(quality and cost) shall be selected. Ministry/Department should be involved
(iv) The weight age of the technical throughout in the conduct of consultancy,
parameters i.e. non- financial preferably by taking a task force approach
parameters in no case should exceed and continuously monitoring the
80 percent. performance of the consultant(s) so that
Rule 193 Least Cost System (LCS). LCS is the output of the consultancy is in line with
appropriate for assignments of a standard the Ministry /Department’s objectives.
or routine nature (such as audits and Rule 196 Public competition for Design of
engineering design of non-complex symbols/logos. Design competition
works) where well established should be conducted in a transparent, fair
methodologies, practices and standards and objective manner. Wide publicity
exist. Unlike QCBS, there is no weight age should be given to the competition so as to
for Technical score in the final evaluation ensure that the information is accessible to
and the responsive technically qualified all possible participants in the competition.
proposal with the lowest evaluated cost This should include publication on the
shall be selected. website of Ministry/Department
Rule 194 Single Source Selection/Consultancy concerned, as also the Central Public
by nomination. The selection by direct Procurement Portal. If the selection has
negotiation/nomination, on the lines of been by a jury of experts nominated for the
Single Tender mode of procurement of purpose, the composition of the jury may
goods, is considered appropriate only also be notified.
under exceptional circumstance such as:
(i) tasks that represent a natural B. OUTSOURCING OF SERVICES
continuation of previous work carried
out by the firm;
Rule 197 "Non-Consulting Service" means any
(ii) in case of an emergency situation, subject matter of procurement (which as
situations arising after natural distinguished from ‘Consultancy
56
Chapter – 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Services’), involve physical, measurable capable contractors and issue limited
deliverables/ outcomes, where tender enquiry to them asking for their
performance standards can be clearly offers by a specified date and time etc.
identified and consistently applied, other as per standard practice. The number
than goods or works, except those of the contractors so identified for
incidental or consequential to the service, issuing limited tender enquiry should
and includes maintenance, hiring of be more than three.
vehicle, outsourcing of building facilities (ii) For estimated value of the non-
management, security, photocopier consulting service above Rs.10 lakhs:
service, janitor, office errand services, The Ministry or Department should
drilling, aerial photography, satellite issue advertisement in such case
imagery, mapping etc. should be given on Central Public
Rule 198 Procurement of Non-consulting Procurement Portal(CPPP)at
Services. www.eprocure.gov.in and on GeM. An
A Ministry or Department may procure organisation having its own website
certain non-consulting services in the should also publish all its advertised
interest of economy and efficiency and it tender enquiries on the website. The
may prescribe detailed instructions and advertisements for invitation of
procedures for this purpose without, tenders should give the complete web
however, contravening the following basic address from where the bidding
guidelines. documents can be downloaded.
Rule 199 Identification of likely contractors. Rule 202 Late Bids. Late bids i.e. bids received after
the specified date and time of receipt
The Ministry or Department should
should not be considered.
prepare a list of likely and potential
contractors on the basis of formal or Rule 203 Evaluation of Bids Received.
informal enquiries from other Ministries or The Ministry or Department should
Departments and Organisations involved evaluate, segregate, rank the responsive
in similar activities, scrutiny of ‘Yellow bids and select the successful bidder for
pages’, and trade journals, if available, placement of the contract.
web site etc. Rule 204 Procurement of Non-consulting
Rule 200 Preparation of Tender enquiry. services by nomination. Should it
Ministry or Department should prepare a become necessary, in an exceptional
tender enquiry containing, inter alia : situation to procure a non-consulting
service from a specifically chosen
(i) The details of the work or service to be
contractor, the Competent Authority in the
performed by the contractor;
Ministry or Department may do so in
(ii) The facilities and the inputs which will
consultation with the Financial Adviser. In
be provided to the contractor by the
such cases the detailed justification, the
Ministry or Department;
circumstances leading to such
(iii) Eligibility and qualification criteria to procurement by choice and the special
be met by the contractor for interest or purpose it shall serve, shall form
performing the required work/service; an integral part of the proposal.
and
Rule 205 Monitoring the Contract. The Ministry or
(iv) The statutory and contractual Department should be involved
obligations to be complied with by the throughout in the conduct of the contract
contractor. and continuously monitor the performance
Rule 201 Invitation of Bids. of the contractor.
(i) For estimated value of the non- Rule 206 Any circumstances which are not covered
consulting service up to Rupees ten in Rule 198 to Rule 205 for procurement of
lakhs or less: The Ministry or non-consulting services, the procuring
Department should scrutinise the entity may refer Rule 135 to Rule 176
preliminary list of likely contractors as pertaining to procurement of goods and
identified as per Rule 199 above, not to the procurement of consulting
decide the prima facie Eligible and services.
57
Chapter – 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
INVENTORY MANAGEMENT
Rule 207 This chapter contains the basic rules receipt shall also be given to this effect
applicable to all Ministries or Departments by the indenting officer to the division
regarding inventory management. sending the materials.
Detailed instructions and procedures (ii) In the case of issue of materials from
relating to inventory management may be stock for departmental use,
prescribed by various Ministries or manufacture, sale, etc., the Officer-in
Departments broadly in conformity with charge of the stores shall see that an
the basic rules contained in this chapter. appropriate indent, in the prescribed
Rule 208 (1) Receipt of goods and materials form has been projected by the
from private suppliers. indenting officer. A written/online
(i) While receiving goods and materials acknowledgement of receipt of
from a supplier, the officer–in-charge material issued shall be obtained from
of stores should refer to the relevant the indenting officer or his authorised
contract terms and follow the representative at the time of issue of
prescribed procedure for receiving the materials.
materials. (iii) In case of materials issued to a
(ii) All materials shall be counted, contractor, the cost of which is
measured or weighed and subjected recoverable from the contractor, all
to visual inspection at the time of relevant particulars, including the
receipt to ensure that the quantities recovery rates and the total value
are correct, the quality is according to chargeable to the contractor should
the required specifications and there be got acknowledged from the
is no damage or deficiency in the contractor duly signed and dated.
materials. Technical inspection where (iv) If the Officer-in-charge of the stores is
required should be carried out at this unable to comply with the indent in
stage by Technical Inspector or full, he should make the supply to the
Agency approved for the purpose. An extent available and make suitable
appropriate receipt, in terms of the entry to this effect in the indentor’s
relevant contract provisions may also copy of the indent. In case alternative
be given to the supplier on receiving materials are available in lieu of the
the materials. indented materials, a suitable
(iii) Details of the material so received indication to this effect may be made
should thereafter be entered in the in the document.
appropriate stock register, preferably Rule 210 Custody of goods and materials. The
in an IT-based system. The officer-in- officer-in-charge of stores having custody
charge of stores should certify that he of goods and materials, especially
has actually received the material and valuable and/or combustible articles, shall
recorded it in the appropriate stock take appropriate steps for arranging their
registers. safe custody, proper storage
Rule 209 Receipt/issue of goods and materials accommodation, including arrangements
from internal divisions of the same for maintaining required temperature,
organisation. dust free environment etc.
(i) The indenting officer requiring goods Rule 211 Lists and Accounts.
and materials from internal division(s) (i) The Officer-in-charge of stores shall
of the same organisation should maintain suitable item-wise lists and
project an indent in the prescribed accounts and prepare accurate
form for this purpose. While receiving returns in respect of the goods and
the supply against the indent, the materials in his charge making it
indenting officer shall examine, possible at any point of time to check
count, measure or weigh the materials the actual balances with the book
as the case may be, to ensure that the balances.
quantities are correct, the quality is in The form of the stock accounts
line with the required specifications mentioned above shall be determined
and there is no damage or deficiency with reference to the nature of the
in the materials. An appropriate
58
Chapter – 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
goods and materials, the frequency of (iii) Discrepancies, including shortages,
the transactions and the special damages and unserviceable goods, if
requirements of the concerned any, identified during verification,
Ministries/Departments. shall immediately be brought to the
(ii) Separate accounts shall be kept for notice of the competent authority for
taking appropriate action in
(a) Fixed Assets such as plant,
accordance with provision given in
machinery, equipment, furniture,
Rule 33 to 38.
fixtures etc. in the Form GFR-22.
Rule 214 Buffer Stock. Depending on the frequency
(b) Consumables such as office
of requirement and quantity thereof as well
stationery, chemicals,
as the pattern of supply of a consumable
maintenance spare parts etc. in
material, optimum buffer stock should be
the Form GFR-23.
determined by the competent authority.
(c) Library books in the Form GFR 18
Note: As the inventory carrying cost is an
(d) Assets of historical/artistic value
expenditure that does not add value to the
held by museum/government
material being stocked, a material
departments in the Form GFR-24.
remaining in stock for over a year shall
Note: These forms can be generally be considered surplus, unless
supplemented with additional adequate reasons to treat it otherwise exist.
details by Ministries/ The items so declared surplus may be dealt
Departments as required. as per the procedure laid down under Rule
Rule 212 Hiring out of Fixed Assets. When a fixed 217.
asset is hired to local bodies, contractors Rule 215 Physical verification of Library books.
or others, proper record should be kept of
(i) Complete physical verification of
the assets and the hire and other charges
books should be done every year in
as determined under rules prescribed by
case of libraries having not more than
the competent authority, should be
twenty thousand volumes. For libraries
recovered regularly. Calculation of the
having more than twenty thousand
charges to be recovered from the local
volumes and up to fifty thousand
bodies, contractors and others as above
volumes, such verification should be
should be based on the historical cost.
done at least once in three years.
Rule 213 (1) Physical verification of Fixed Assets. Sample physical verification at
The inventory for fixed assets shall intervals of not more than three years
ordinarily be maintained at site. Fixed should be done in case of libraries
assets should be verified at least once in a having more than fifty thousand
year and the outcome of the verification volumes. In case such verification
recorded in the corresponding register. reveals unusual or unreasonable
Discrepancies, if any, shall be promptly shortages, complete verification shall
investigated and brought to account. be done.
Rule 213 (2) Verification of Consumables: (ii) Loss of five volumes per one thousand
A physical verification of all the volumes of books issued/consulted in
consumable goods and materials should a year may be taken as reasonable
be undertaken at least once in a year and provided such losses are not
discrepancies, if any, should be recorded attributable to dishonesty or
in the stock register for appropriate action negligence. However, loss of a book of
by the competent authority. a value exceeding Rs. 1,000/- (Rupees
One thousand only) and rare books
Rule 213 (3) Procedure for verification :
irrespective of value shall invariably be
(i) Verification shall always be made in
investigated and appropriate action
the presence of the officer, responsible
taken.
for the custody of the inventory being
Rule 216 Transfer of charge of goods, materials
verified.
etc. In case of transfer of Officer-in-charge
(ii) A certificate of verification along with
of the goods, materials etc., the transferred
the findings shall be recorded in the
officer shall see that the goods or material
stock register.
59
Chapter – 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
are made over correctly to his successor. A (ii) For surplus or obsolete or
statement giving all relevant details of the unserviceable goods with residual
goods, materials etc., in question shall be value less than Rupees Two Lakh, the
prepared and signed with date by the mode of disposal will be determined
relieving officer and the relieved officer. by the competent authority, keeping in
Each of these officers will retain a copy of view the necessity to avoid
the signed statement. accumulation of such goods and
consequential blockage of space and,
Rule 217 Disposal of Goods.
also, deterioration in value of goods to
(i) An item may be declared surplus or
be disposed of. Ministries/
obsolete or unserviceable if the same
Departments should, as far as
is of no use to the Ministry or
possible prepare a list of such goods.
Department. The reasons for
(iii) Certain surplus or obsolete or
declaring the item surplus or obsolete
unserviceable goods such as expired
or unserviceable should be recorded
medicines, food grain, ammunition
by the authority competent to
etc., which are hazardous or unfit for
purchase the item.
human consumption, should be
(ii) The competent authority may, at his
disposed of or destroyed immediately
discretion, constitute a committee at
by adopting suitable mode so as to
appropriate level to declare item(s) as
avoid any health hazard and/or
surplus or obsolete or unserviceable.
environmental pollution and also the
(iii) The book value, guiding price and possibility of misuse of such goods.
reserved price, which will be required
(iv) Surplus or obsolete or unserviceable
while disposing of the surplus goods,
goods, equipment and documents,
should also be worked out. In case
which involve security concerns (e.g.
where it is not possible to work out the
currency, negotiable instruments,
book value, the original purchase
receipt books, stamps, security press
price of the goods in question may be
etc.) should be disposed of/ destroyed
utilised. A report of stores for disposal
in an appropriate manner to ensure
shall be prepared in Form GFR - 10.
compliance with rules relating to
(iv) In case an item becomes official secrets as well as financial
unserviceable due to negligence, prudence.
fraud or mischief on the part of a
Rule 219 Disposal through Advertised Tender.
Government servant, responsibility
(i) The broad steps to be adopted for this
for the same should be fixed.
purpose are as follows :
(v) Sale of Hazardous waste/Scrap
(a) Preparation of bidding
Batteries/Electronic waste: Scrap
documents.
lots comprising of hazardous waste,
(b) Invitation of tender for the surplus
batteries etc. shall be sold keeping in
goods to be sold.
view the extant guidelines of Ministry
of Environment & Forest. Prospective (c) Opening of bids.
bidders of such lots of hazardous (d) Analysis and evaluation of bids
waste/scrap batteries/ e-waste should received.
be in possession of registration, valid (e) Selection of highest responsive
on the date of e-Auction and on the bidder.
date of delivery, as recycler/ pre-
(f) Collection of sale value from the
processor agency.
selected bidder.
Rule 218 Modes of Disposal.
(g) Issue of sale release order to the
(I) Surplus or obsolete or unserviceable selected bidder.
goods of assessed residual value
(h) Release of the sold surplus goods
above Rupees Two Lakh should be
to the selected bidder.
disposed of by :
(i) Return of bid security to the
(a) obtaining bids through advertised
unsuccessful bidders.
tender or
(ii) The important aspects to be kept
(b) public auction.
60 61
Chapter – 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
in view while disposing the goods
next higher bidder(s) at the
through advertised tender are as
price offered by the highest
under:-
acceptable bidder.
(a) The basic principle for sale of
(f) Full payment, i.e. the residual
such goods through
amount after adjusting the bid
advertised tender is ensuring
security should be obtained
transparency, competition,
from the successful bidder
fairness and elimination of
before releasing the goods.
discretion. Wide publicity
should be ensured of the sale (g) In case the selected bidder
plan and the goods to be does not show interest in
sold. All the required terms lifting the goods, the bid
and conditions of sale are to security should be forfeited
be incorporated in the and other actions initiated
bidding document including re-sale of the goods
comprehensively in plain and in question at the risk and cost
s i m p l e l a n g u a g e . of the defaulter, after
Applicability of taxes, as obtaining legal advice.
relevant, should be clearly (iii) Late bids i.e. bids received after the
stated in the document. specified date and time of receipt should
(b) The bidding document not to be considered.
should also indicate the Rule 220 Disposal through Auction.
location and present (i) A Ministry or Department may
condition of the goods to be undertake auction of goods to be
sold so that the bidders can disposed of either directly or through
inspect the goods before approved auctioneers.
bidding.
(ii) The basic principles to be followed
(c) The bidders should be asked here are similar to those applicable for
to furnish bid security along disposal through advertised tender so
with their bids. The amount of as to ensure transparency,
bid security should ordinarily competition, fairness and elimination
be ten per cent. of the of discretion. The auction plan
assessed or reserved price of including details of the goods to be
the goods. The exact bid auctioned and their location,
security amount should be applicable terms and conditions of the
indicated in the bidding sale etc. should be given wide publicity
document. in the same manner as is done in case
(d) The bid of the highest of advertised tender.
acceptable responsive bidder (iii) While starting the auction process, the
should normally be accepted. condition and location of the goods to
However, if the price offered be auctioned, applicable terms and
by that bidder is not conditions of sale etc., (as already
acceptable, negotiation may indicated earlier while giving vide
be held only with that bidder. publicity for the same), should be
In case such negotiation does announced again for the benefit of the
not provide the desired result, assembled bidders.
the reasonable or acceptable
(iv) During the auction process,
price may be counter offered
acceptance or rejection of a bid should
to the next highest responsive
be announced immediately on the
bidder(s).
stroke of the hammer. If a bid is
(e) In case the total quantity to be accepted, earnest money (not less
disposed of cannot be taken than twenty-five per cent. of the bid
up by the highest acceptable value) should immediately be taken on
bidder, the remaining the spot from the successful bidder
quantity may be offered to the
Chapter – 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
either in cash or in the form of (iii) anticipated losses on account of
Deposit-at-Call-Receipt (DACR), obsolescence of stores or of purchases
drawn in favour of the Ministry or in excess of requirements;
Department selling the goods. The (iv) losses due to damage, and
goods should be handed over to the
(v) losses due to extra ordinary situations
successful bidder only after receiving
under ‘Force Majeure’ conditions like
the balance payment.
fire, flood, enemy action, etc.;
(v) The composition of the auction team
will be decided by the competent
authority. The team should however
include an officer of the Internal
Finance Wing of the department
Rule 221 Disposal at scrap value or by other
modes. If a Ministry or Department is
unable to sell any surplus or obsolete or
unserviceable item in spite of its attempts
through advertised tender or auction, it
may dispose of the same at its scrap value
with the approval of the competent
authority in consultation with Finance
division. In case the Ministry or
Department is unable to sell the item even
at its scrap value, it may adopt any other
mode of disposal including destruction of
the item in an eco-friendly manner.
Rule 222 A sale account should be prepared for
goods disposed of in Form GFR 11 duly
signed by the officer who supervised the
sale or auction.
Rule 223 (1) Powers to write off. All profits and
losses due to revaluation, stock-taking or
other causes shall be duly recorded and
adjusted where necessary. Formal
sanction of the competent authority shall
be obtained in respect of losses, even
though no formal correction or adjustment
in government accounts is involved.
Powers to write off of losses are available
under the Delegation of Financial Powers
Rules.
Rule 223 (2) Losses due to depreciation : Losses
due to depreciation shall be analysed, and
recorded under following heads, as
applicable :-
(I) normal fluctuation of market prices;
(ii) normal wear and tear;
(iii) lack of foresight in regulating
purchases; and
(iv) negligence after purchase.
Rule 223 (3) Losses not due to depreciation :
Losses not due to depreciation shall be
grouped under the following heads :-
(I) losses due to theft or fraud;
(ii) losses due to neglect;
62
Chapter – 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
CONTRACT MANAGEMENT
Rule 224 (1) All contracts shall be made by an between Rupees one lakh to
authority empowered to do so by or under Rupees ten lakhs, where tender
the orders of the President in terms of documents include the General
Article 299 (1) of the Constitution of India. Conditions of Contract (GCC),
Rule 224 (2) All the contracts and assurances of Special Conditions of Contract
property made in the exercise of the (SCC) and scope of work, the
executive power of the Union shall be letter of acceptance will result in a
executed on behalf of the President. The binding contract.
words “for and on behalf of the President (c) In respect of contracts for works
of India” should follow the designation with estimated value of Rupees ten
appended below the signature of the lakhs or above or for purchase
officer authorized in this behalf. above Rupees ten lakhs, a
Note 1: The various classes of contracts Contract document should be
and assurances of property, which may be executed, with all necessary
executed by different authorities, are clauses to make it a self-
specified in the Notifications issued by the contained contract. If however,
Ministry of Law from time to time. these are preceded by Invitation to
Tender, accompanied by GCC
Note 2: The powers of various authorities,
and SCC, with full details of scope
the conditions under which such powers
and specifications, a simple one
should be exercised and the general
page contract can be entered into
procedure prescribed with regard to
by attaching copies of the GCC
various classes of contracts and
and SCC, and details of scope
assurances of property are laid down in
and specifications, Offer of the
Rule 21 of the Delegation of Financial
Tenderer and Letter of
Powers Rules.
Acceptance.
Rule 225 General principles for contract.
(d) Contract document should be
The following general principles should be
invariably executed in cases of
observed while entering into contracts:—
turnkey works or agreements for
(i) The terms of contract must be precise, maintenance of equipment,
definite and without any ambiguities. provision of services etc.
The terms should not involve an
(v) No work of any kind should be
uncertain or indefinite liability, except
commenced without proper execution
in the case of a cost plus contract or
of an agreement as given in the
where there is a price variation clause
foregoing provisions.
in the contract.
(vi) Contract document, where necessary,
(ii) Standard forms of contracts should be
should be executed within 21 days of
adopted wherever possible, with such
the issue of letter of acceptance. Non-
modifications as are considered
fulfilment of this condition of executing
necessary in respect of individual
a contract by the Contractor or
contracts. The modifications should
Supplier would constitute sufficient
be carried out only after obtaining
ground for annulment of the award
financial and legal advice.
and forfeiture of Earnest Money
(iii) In cases where standard forms of Deposit.
contracts are not used, legal and
(vii) Cost plus contracts should ordinarily
financial advice should be taken in
be avoided. Where such contracts
drafting the clauses in the contract.
become unavoidable, full justification
(iv) (a) A Ministry or Department may, at its should be recorded before entering
discretion, make purchases of into the contract. Where supplies or
value up to Rupees two lakh and special work covered by such cost plus
fifty thousand by issuing purchase contracts have to continue over a long
orders containing basic terms and duration, efforts should be made to
conditions: convert future contracts on a firm price
(b) In respect of Works Contracts, or basis after allowing a reasonable
Contracts for purchases valued period to the suppliers/contractors to
63
Chapter – 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
stabilize their production/ execution minimum percentage of variation
methods and processes. of the contract price above which
Explanation : A cost plus contract means price variations will be admissible
a contract in which the price payable for (e.g. where resultant increase is
supplies or services under the contract is lower than two per cent. no price
determined on the basis of actual cost of adjustment will be made in favour
production of the supplies or services of the supplier).
concerned plus profit either at a fixed rate (f) Where advance or stage
per unit or at a fixed percentage on the payments are made there should
actual cost of production. be a further stipulation that no
(viii) (a) Price Variation Clause can be price variations will be admissible
provided only in long-term on such portions of the price, after
contracts, where the delivery the dates of such payment.
period extends beyond 18 (g) Where deliveries are accepted
months. In short-term contracts beyond the scheduled Delivery
firm and fixed prices should be Date subject to levy of liquidated
provided for. Where a price damages as provided in the
variation clause is provided, the Contract, the liquidated damages
price agreed upon should specify (if a percentage of the price) will
the base level viz, the month and be applicable on the price as
year to which the price is linked, varied by the operation of the
to enable variations being Price variation clause.
calculated with reference to the (h) No price variation will be
price levels prevailing in that admissible beyond the original
month and year. Scheduled Delivery Date for
(b) A formula for calculation of the defaults on the part of the
price variations that have taken supplier.
place between the Base level and (i) Price variation may be allowed
the Scheduled Delivery Date beyond the original Scheduled
should be included in this clause. Delivery Date, by specific
The variations are calculated by alteration of that date through an
using indices published by amendment to the contract in
Governments or Chambers of cases of Force Majeure or defaults
Commerce periodically. An by Government.
illustrative formula has been
(j) Where contracts are for supply of
appended to these rules at
equipment, goods etc, imported
Appendix -11 for guidance.
(subject to customs duty and
(c) The Price variation clause should foreign exchange fluctuations)
also specify cut off dates for and/or locally manufactured
material and labour, as these (subject to excise duty and other
inputs taper off well before the duties and taxes), the percentage
scheduled Delivery Dates. and element of duties and taxes
(d) The price variation clause should included in the price should be
provide for a ceiling on price specifically stated, along with the
variations, particularly where selling rate of foreign exchange
escalations are involved. It could element taken into account in the
be a percentage per annum or an calculation of the price of the
overall ceiling or both. The buyer imported item.
should ensure a provision in the The mode of calculation of
contract for benefit of any variations in duties and taxes and
reduction in the price in terms of Foreign exchange rates and the
the price variation clause being documents to be produced in
passed on to him. support of claims for such
(e) The clause should also stipulate a variations should also be
stipulated in the Contract.
64
Chapter – 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(k) The clause should also contain (xiv) (a) The terms of a contract,
the mode and terms of payment including the scope and
of the price variation admissible. specification once entered into,
(ix) Contracts should include provision for should not be materially varied.
payment of all applicable taxes by the (b) Wherever material variation in
contractor or supplier. any of the terms or conditions in
(x) “Lump sum’ contracts should not be a contract becomes
entered into except in cases of unavoidable, the financial and
absolute necessity. Where lump sum other effects involved should be
contracts become unavoidable, full examined and recorded and
justification should be recorded. The specific approval of the
contracting authority should ensure authority competent to approve
that conditions in the lump sum the revised financial and other
contract adequately safeguard and commitments obtained, before
protect the interests of the varying the conditions.
Government. (c) All such changes should be in
(xi) Departmental issue of materials the form of an amendment to
should be avoided as far as possible. the contract duly signed by all
Where it is decided to supply materials parties to the contract.
departmentally, a schedule of (xv) Normally no extensions of the
quantities with the issue rates of such scheduled delivery or completion
material as are required to execute the dates should be granted except
contract work should form an where events constituting force
essential part of the contract. majeure, as provided in the
(xii)(a) In contracts where government contract, have occurred or the terms
property is entrusted to a and conditions include such a
contractor either for use on provision for other reasons.
payment of hire charges or for Extensions as provided in the
doing further work on such contract may be allowed through
property, specific provision for formal amendments to the contract
safeguarding government duly signed by parties to the
property (including insurance contract.
cover) and for recovery of hire (xvi) All contracts shall contain a
charges regularly, should be provision for recovery of liquidated
included in the contracts. damages for defaults on the part of
(b) Provision should be made in the the contractor. Only in exceptional
contract for periodical physical circumstances to be justified by
verification of the number and the procuring entity in writing, an
physical condition of the items at exemption from such provision can
the contractor’s premises. Results be made.
of such verification should be (xvii) A warranty clause should be
recorded and appropriate penal incorporated in every contract,
action taken where necessary. requiring the supplier to, without
(xiii)Copies of all contracts and charge, repair or rectify defective
agreements for purchases of the value goods or to replace such goods with
of Rupees Twenty-five Lakhs and similar goods free from defect. Any
above, and of all rate and running goods repaired or replaced by the
contracts entered into by civil supplier shall be delivered at the
departments of the Government other buyers premises without costs to the
than the departments like the buyer.
Directorate General of Supplies and (xviii) All contracts for supply of goods
Disposals for which a special audit should reserve the right of
procedure exists, should be sent to the Government to reject goods which
Audit Officer and /or the Accounts do not conform to the specifications.
officer as the case may be.
65
Chapter – 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(xix) No claim for the payment from
contractor shall be entertained after
the lapse of three years of arising of
the claim.
Rule 226 Management of Contracts.
(i) Implementation of the contract should
be strictly monitored and notices
issued promptly whenever a breach of
provisions occurs.
(ii) Proper procedure for safe custody and
monitoring of Bank Guarantees or
other Instruments should be laid
down. Monitoring should include a
monthly review of all Bank
Guarantees or other instruments
expiring after three months, along
with a review of the progress of supply
or work. Extensions of Bank
Guarantees or other instruments,
where warranted, should be sought
immediately.
Rule 227 Legal Advice.
Wherever disputes arise during
implementation of a contract, legal advice
should be sought before initiating action
to refer the dispute to conciliation and/or
arbitration as provided in the contract or
to file a suit where the contract does not
include an arbitration clause. The draft of
the plaint for arbitration should be got
vetted by obtaining legal and financial
advice. Documents to be filed in the matter
of resolution of dispute, if any, should be
carefully scrutinized before filing to
safeguard government interest.
66
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GRANTS-IN-AID AND LOANS
I. GRANTS-IN-AID (iii) Stringent criteria should be followed
for setting up of new autonomous
organisations and the type of activities
Rule 228 As a general principle Grants-in-aid can
to be undertaken by them. The
be given to a person or a public body or an
Ministry or Department should
institution having a distinct legal entity.
examine in detail: (a) whether the
Thus Grants-in-aid including scholarships
activities proposed to be taken up are
may be sanctioned by an authority
necessary at all; (b) whether these
competent to do so under the Delegation
activities, if necessary, need to be
of Financial Powers Rules to :—
undertaken by setting up an
(a) Institutions or Organizations set up as
autonomous organisation only or
Autonomous Organisations, under a
whether these could be performed by
specific statute or as a society
the concerned Government agency or
registered under the Societies
any other organisation already
Registration Act, 1860 or Indian Trusts
existing.
Act, 1882 or other statutes.
(iv) All autonomous organisations, new or
(b) Voluntary organizations or Non-
already in existence should be
Government Organisations carrying
encouraged to maximise generation
out activities which promote the
of internal resources and eventually
welfare schemes and programmes of
attain self-sufficiency.
the Government should be selected
(v) The Ministry or Department may
on the basis of well-defined criteria
consider creating a Corpus Fund for
regarding financial and other
an Autonomous Body only with prior
resources, credibility and type of
concurrence of Ministry of Finance if
activities undertaken.
the corpus is created out of budgetary
(c) Educational and other institutions by
allocation. If the corpus is created out
way of scholarships or stipends to the
of internal accruals of the body,
students.
approval of the administrative Ministry
(d) Urban and Rural local self- must be obtained.
government institutions
(vi) User Charges: Governing Body of the
(e) Co-operative societies. Autonomous Body shall review user
(f) Societies or clubs set up by charges/ sources of internal revenue
Government servants to promote generation at least once a year and
amongst themselves social, cultural inform the administrative Ministry. This
and sports activities as recreational exercise should preferably be
avenues. completed before the formulation of
Union Annual Budget.
Rule 229 General Principles for setting up of
Autonomous Organisations referred to (vii) All Autonomous Bodies should
under Rule 228(a):- maintain database relating to grants,
income, expenditure, investment
(i) No new autonomous institutions
assets and employee strength in the
should be created by Ministries or
format prescribed by the Department
Departments without the approval of
of Expenditure, Ministry of Finance.
the Cabinet.
(viii)Financial advice for Autonomous
(ii) No new autonomous institution
Bodies: Every autonomous
should be created by an Autonomous
organisation should designate an
Body itself, the appraisal/approval
officer at appropriate level to render
process for creation of new
financial advice whose concurrence
autonomous bodies would apply in
should be obtained for sanction and
such cases too. However, Regional
incurring of expenditure. The financial
Centres/Offices/Sub-Stations of any
limits up to which such concurrence is
autonomous body can be created with
mandatory may be drawn up by each
prior approval of the administrative
organisation. The Chief Executive
ministry in consultation with Ministry
Officer of the Autonomous body will
of Finance.
be responsible for overall financial
67
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
management of the autonomous utilised by others, are levied at
bodies. appropriate rates
(ix) Peer review of autonomous (g) the scope for maximizing internal
organisations: Ministry shall put in resources generation in the
place a system of external or internal organisation so that the
peer review of autonomous dependence upon Government
organisations every three or five years budgetary support is minimised.
depending on the size and nature of (x) An organisation whose performance is
activity. Such a review should be the found to be outstanding and
responsibility of the concerned internationally acclaimed as a result of
administrative division of the the review envisaged under Para (v)
Ministry/Department and should above should be granted greater
focus, inter alia, on; autonomy and increased flexibility in
(a) the objective for which the matters of recruitment and financial
autonomous organisation was set rules thereby enabling it to devise and
up and whether these objectives adopt staff structures, procedures and
have been or are being achieved; rules suited to improving their
(b) whether the activities should be productivity.
continued at all, either because (xi) Autonomous organisations as also
they are no longer relevant or others with a budgetary support of
have been completed or if there more than Rupees five crores per
has been a substantial failure in annum, should be required to enter
achievement of objectives. into a Memorandum of
(c) whether the nature of the activities Understanding with the Administrative
is such that these need to be Ministry or Department, spelling out
performed only by an clearly performance parameters,
autonomous organisation. output targets in terms of details of
programme of work and qualitative
(d) whether similar functions are also
improvement in output, along with
being undertaken by other
commensurate input requirements.
organisations, be it in the
The output targets, given in
Central Government or State
measurable units of performance,
Governments or the Private Sector,
should form the basis of budgetary
and if so, whether there is scope
support extended to these
for merging or winding up the
organisations. The roadmap for
organisations under review.
improved performance with clear
(e) whether the total staff
milestones should form part of the
complement, particularly at the
MoU.
support level, is kept at a
(xii) Findings of the peer review should be
minimum: whether the enormous
examined and put up for appropriate
strides in information technology
decision to the Secretary by the
and communication facilities as
concerned programme division of the
also facilities for outsourcing of
Administrative Department. Further
work on a contract basis, have
releases of Grant (after three or five
been taken into account in
years, as the case may be), should be
determining staff strength; and
made conditional on conduct and
whether scientific or technical
decisions on the findings of such peer
personnel are being deployed on
review.
functions which could well be
carried out by non-scientific or Rule 230 (1) Principles and Procedure for award
non-technical personnel etc. of Grants-in-aid.
(f) whether user charges including Any Institution or Organisation seeking
overhead/ institutional charges / Grants-in-aid from Government will be
management fee in respect of required to submit an application which
sponsored projects, wherever the includes all relevant information such as
output or benefit of services are
68
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Articles of Association, bye-laws, audited Grant or each instalment of it, is to be
statement of accounts, sources and spent.
pattern of income and expenditure etc. Rule 230 (5) Central Autonomous Organisations
enabling the sanctioning authority to which receive Grants should account for
assess the suitability of the Institution or capital and revenue expenditure
Organisation seeking Grant. The separately. The Government of India,
application should clearly spell out the Ministry of Finance has formulated
need for seeking Grant and should be standard formats for presentation of final
submitted in such form as may be accounts, for all Central Autonomous
prescribed by the sanctioning authority. Organisations. All Grant sanctioning
The Institution or Organisation seeking authorities should enforce the condition of
Grants-in-aid should also certify that it has maintaining and presenting their annual
not obtained or applied for grants for the accounts in the standard formats on all
same purpose or activity from any other Central Autonomous Organisations.
Ministry or Department of the Government
Rule 230 (6) The Grants sanctioning authorities
of India or State Government.
should not only take into account the
Rule 230 (2) In order to obviate duplication in internally generated resources while
Grants-in-aid, each Ministry or regulating the award of Grants but should
Department should maintain a list of consider laying down targets for internal
institutions or organisations along with resources generation by the Grantee
details of amount and purpose of Grants Institutions or Organisations every
given to them. These details should also financial year, particularly where Grants
be made available on the website of the are given on recurring basis every year.
Ministry/Department.
Rule 230 (7) Unspent Balances: When recurring
Rule 230 (3) Award of Grants should be considered Grants-in-aid are sanctioned to the same
only on the basis of viable and specific Institution or Organisation for the same
schemes drawn up in sufficient detail by purpose, the unspent balance of the
the institution or organisation. The budget previous Grant should be taken into
for such schemes should disclose, inter account in sanctioning the subsequent
alia, the specific quantified and qualitative Grant. For this purpose, the Programme
targets likely to be attained against the Division of Ministries/Department shall
outlay. In the cases of the schemes where take help of PFMS Portal to know the bank
Grants are given as part of the expenditure balance of the recipients before making
on reimbursement basis (i.e. the each release. The instructions of
expenditure has already been incurred Department of Expenditure regarding the
on approved project/scheme and use of PFMS Portal for Central Sector
reimbursement from the Government in Schemes issued from time to time shall be
the form of Grant/Subsidy etc. is due) the strictly followed by all Ministries/
same will be treated as the Central Departments. The principles of ‘just in time
Financial Assistance (CFA) and no release’, should be applied for releases in
Utilization Certificate shall be required in respect of all payments to the extent
such cases of reimbursements. possible. The following broad principles
Rule 230 (4) Recurring Grant is defined as one shall be adhered to:
which is released periodically to the same (i) Cash balance at a time should
organization for the same purpose. Non- preferably not be more than 3 months
recurring Grant is one time release to an of requirements
organization for a special purpose (which
(ii) Funds should be released as per
could be released in instalments). Every
actual requirements and that sanction
order sanctioning a Grant shall indicate
may precede the release of funds,
whether it is recurring or non-recurring
though its validity may be limited to
and specify clearly the object for which it is
that financial year.
being given and the general and special
Rule 230 (8) All interests or other earnings against
conditions, if any, attached to the Grant. In
Grants in aid or advances (other than
the case of non-recurring Grants for
reimbursement) released to any Grantee
specified object, the order shall also
institution should be mandatorily remitted
specify the time limit within which the
69
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
to the Consolidated Fund of India Rule 230 (12)
immediately after finalisation of the (i) All Grantee Institutions or
accounts. Such advances should not be Organisations which receive more
allowed to be adjusted against future than fifty per cent. of their recurring
releases. expenditure in the form of Grants-in-
Rule 230 (9) In making Grants to Non-Government aid, should ordinarily formulate terms
or Quasi-Government Institutions or and conditions of service of their
Organisations, a condition should be laid employees which are, by and large,
down that assets acquired wholly or not higher than those applicable to
substantially out of Government Grants, similar categories of employees in
except those declared as obsolete and Central Government. In exceptional
unserviceable or condemned in cases relaxation may be made in
accordance with the procedure laid down consultation with the Ministry of
in the General Financial Rules, shall not be Finance.
disposed of without obtaining the prior (ii) Grantee Institutions or Organisations
approval of the authority which sanctioned should be encouraged to take
the Grants-in-aid. advantage of the pension or gratuity
Rule 230 (10) The sanctioning authority may schemes or Group Insurance Schemes
prescribe conditions regarding quantum or house buildings loans or vehicle
and periodicity for release of Grants-in- loans schemes etc. available in the
aid in instalments in consultation with the market for employees instead of
Financial Adviser. However, the release of undertaking liability on their own or
the last instalment of the Annual Grant Government account.
must be conditional upon the Grantee Rule 230 (13) The sanctioning authority, while
Institutions providing reasonable evidence laying down the pattern of assistance, may
of proper utilization of instalments decide whether the ownership of buildings
released earlier. In the cases where constructed with Grants-in-aid may vest
Central Financial Assistance (CFA) has with Government or the Grantee Institution
been sanctioned, the grant will be or Organisation. Where the ownership is
released in one instalment upon the vested in the Government, the Grantee
Grantee Institutions/ Organisation Institution or Organisation may be allowed
providing complete evidence of achieving to occupy the building as a lessee. In such
the specified objectives and expenditure cases suitable record of details of location,
incurred supported by Audited Statement cost, name of lessee and terms and
of Expenditure. In these cases, the grantee conditions of lease must be maintained in
institutions will not be required to submit the records of the granting Ministry or
Utilization Certificates. Department. In all cases of buildings
Rule 230 (11) In order to finalize the Budgetary constructed with Grants-in-aid,
Estimates of Grants in aid to the Grantee responsibility of maintenance of such
Institutions, the Ministry or Department buildings shall be of the Grantee Institution
should impress upon Institution or or Organisation.
Organisation desiring Grants from Rule 230 (14) Any other special terms and
Government, to submit their requirement conditions or procedures for transaction of
with supporting details by the end of business as Government may desire to be
September in the year preceding the year followed by the Grantee Institution or
for which the Grants-in-aid is sought. The Organisation, shall be got incorporated in
Ministry or Department should finalize the Articles of Association or bye-laws of
their examination of the requests with the the Institution or Organisation concerned
utmost expedition and make the necessary before release of Grants-in-aid.
Budget provision where it is decided to Rule 230 (15) Grants-in-aid may be sanctioned to
sanction Grants. The Institution or meet the bonafide expenditure incurred
Organisation should be informed of the not earlier than two years prior to the date
result of their requests by April of the of issue of the sanction.
succeeding year.
Rule 230 (16) The stipulation in regard to refund of
70
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
the unutilised amount of Grant-in-aid with (i) The Grants-in-aid should not exceed
interest thereon should be brought out twenty-five per cent. of approved
clearly in the letter sanctioning the Grant administrative expenditure on pay and
as well as in the bond so required to be allowances of the personnel of the
executed. voluntary organisation concerned;
Rule 230. (17) (i) As a precondition to the sanction (ii) Grants-in-aid to meet administrative
of Grants-in-aid to the agencies expenditure to any private institutions
where: other than the voluntary organizations
(a) the recipient body employs more should not ordinarily be sanctioned. In
than twenty persons on a regular exceptional cases such Grants can be
basis and at least fifty per cent of considered for sanction in consultation
its recurring expenditure is met with Internal Finance Wing.
from Grants-in-aid from Central Rule 231 (2) Before a Grant is released, the
Government; and members of the Executive Committee of
(b) the body is a registered society or the Grantee should be asked to Execute
a co-operative institution and is in Bonds in a prescribed format binding
receipt of a general purpose themselves jointly and severally to:-
annual Grants-in-aid of Rupees (i) abide by the conditions of the Grants-
twenty lakhs and above from the in-aid by the target dates, if any,
Consolidated Fund of India; specified therein; and
the Grant sanctioning authority (ii) not to divert the Grants or entrust
should ensure that a suitable clause is execution of the scheme or work
invariably included in the terms and concerned to another Institution(s) or
conditions under which the Grants-in- Organization(s); and
aid are given, to provide for (iii) abide by any other conditions
reservation for Scheduled Castes and specified in the agreement governing
Scheduled Tribes or OBC in posts and the Grants-in-aid.
services under such organizations or
(iv) In the event of the Grantee failing to
agencies. The relative provision may
comply with the conditions or
be on the following lines :-
committing breach of the conditions of
“…………….. (Name of the Bond, the signatories to the Bond
Institution or Organization etc.) shall be jointly and severally liable to
agrees to make reservations for refund to the President of India, the
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled whole or a part amount of the Grant
Tribes or OBC in the posts or services with interest at ten per cent. per
under its control on the lines indicated annum thereon or the sum specified
by the Government of India”. under the Bond. The stamp duty for
(ii) While sanctioning Grants-in-aid to this Bond shall be borne by the
Institutions or Organisations referred Government.
to in (a) above, the Grant sanctioning Rule 231 (3) Execution of Bond will not apply to
authority should keep in view the Quasi-Government Institutions,
progress made by such Institutions or Central Autonomous Organisations and
Organisations in employing Institutions whose budget is approved by
Scheduled Castes and Scheduled the Government
Tribes or OBC candidates in their
Rule 232 General Principles for award of
services.
Grants-in-aid for Centrally Sponsored
Rule 231 (1) Grants-in-aid to “Voluntary Schemes. The following principles should
Organisations” Subject to the following be kept in view by Ministries/Departments
terms and conditions, Grants-in-aid of the Central Government at the time of
towards administrative expenditure may designing Centrally Sponsored Schemes
be sanctioned to voluntary organizations for implementation in State Governments
to ensure a certain minimum staff structure or Union Territories and approving and
and qualified personnel to improve their releasing assistance to State Governments
effectiveness and expand their activities or Union Territories for such schemes: -
under the following conditions :-
71
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(i) Every Centrally Sponsored Scheme (vii) A concurrent monitoring and
should have a time-bound evaluation mechanism should be built
quantifiable and measurable into the Scheme. A periodic review of
outcome targets with provisions for every Centrally Sponsored Scheme
periodic monitoring, mid-term should be undertaken for any required
evaluation and detailed impact mid-course correction or changes in
studies. the scheme design
(ii) The scheme should be designed in (viii)A post-completion review of every
consultation with States and Union Centrally Sponsored Scheme should
Territories. States should be delegated be undertaken by the State
adequate powers to change the Government(s) or Union Territories
details of the schemes to suit local implementing the scheme,
conditions, subject to reporting such highlighting the time and cost
changes to the concerned Ministry or overruns, if any, and suggestions for
Department. formulating and implementing future
(iii) Where schemes are in operation with schemes. A copy of the review should
similar objectives targeting the same be obtained by the Ministry concerned
population, the schemes should be and kept in view while formulating
converged . new Centrally Sponsored Schemes.
(iv) To ensure monitoring and effective Rule 233 Funding of Sponsored Projects or
control over such schemes, the Schemes.
number of schemes should be (i) Ministries or Departments of
restricted, so that the gain from the Government sponsor projects or
expenditure on such schemes is schemes to be undertaken by
maximized. The role of the Central Universities, Indian Institute of
Ministries or Departments should be Technology and other similar
capacity building, inter-sectoral Autonomous Organisations such as
coordination and detailed ICAR, CSIR, ICMR etc., the results from
monitoring. which are expected to be in national
(v) The release of funds to State interest. Normally the entire
Governments and monitoring further expenditure on such projects or
utilisation should be undertaken schemes including capital
through PFMS. The Ministries or expenditure, is funded by the Ministry
Departments should establish a or Department. The funds released for
mechanism to ensure that the funds such projects or schemes in one or
earlier released have been effectively more installments are not treated as
utilised and that the data and facts Grants-in-aid in the books of the
reported by the State Governments or implementing agency. Apart from the
Union Territories relating to physical requirement of submission of
and financial performance are technical and financial reports on
correct. Before releasing further completion of the project or scheme, a
funds, it should also be ensured that stipulation should be made in such
the State Governments or Union cases that the ownership in the
Territories have the capacity to actually physical and intellectual assets
spend the balance from the previous created or acquired out of such funds
years and the releases during the shall vest in the sponsor. While the
current year. Project or Scheme is ongoing, the
recipients should not treat such assets
(vi) The Ministries or Departments should
as their own assets in their Books of
focus attention on the attainment of
Accounts but should disclose their
the objectives and not on expenditure
holding and using such assists in the
only. A mechanism for avoiding
Notes to Accounts specifically.
release of large part of funds towards
the end of the year should be devised (ii) On completion of the Projects or
and incorporated in the Scheme Schemes and the receipt of technical
design itself. and financial reports, the Ministries/
Departments should decide and
72
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
communicate to the implementing (iii) Information at column (xiii) of the
agencies whether the assets should be Form GFR-21 above should be used
returned, sold or retained by them. also for regulating the subsequent
(iii) If the assets are to be sold, the Grants.
proceeds therefrom should be Rule 235 Accounts of Grantee Institutions.
credited to the account of the Institutions or Organisations receiving
sponsoring Department/ Grants should, irrespective of the amount
Organisation. If the assets are involved, be required to maintain
allowed to be retained by the subsidiary accounts of the Government
Institution/Organisation, the grant and furnish to the Accounts Officer a
implementing agency should include set of audited statement of accounts. These
the assets at the book value in their audited statements of accounts should be
own accounts. required to be furnished after utilization of
Rule 234 Register of Grants. A Register of Grants the Grants-in-aid or whenever called for.
shall be maintained by the sanctioning Rule 236 (1) Audit of Accounts. The accounts of
authority in the format given in all Grantee Institutions or Organisations
Form GFR - 21. shall be open to inspection by the
(i) Columns (i) to (v) of the Register in sanctioning authority and audit, both by
format at Form GFR - 21 should be the Comptroller and Auditor General of
filled in simultaneously with the issue India under the provision of CAG(DPC) Act
of the order sanctioning each Grant. 1971 and internal audit by the Principal
These columns should be attested by Accounts Office of the Ministry or
any Gazetted Officer nominated for Department, whenever the Institution or
the purpose by the sanctioning Organisation is called upon to do so and a
authority. The serial number should provision to this effect should invariably be
be recorded on the body of the incorporated in all orders sanctioning
sanction at the time the item is entered Grants-in-aid.
in the Register as under : “Noted at Rule 236 (2)
Serial No ………………in the Register (i) The accounts of the Grantee Institution
of Grants”. or Organisation shall be audited by
(ii) Such a record will guard against the the Comptroller and Auditor General
possibility of double payment. of India under Section 14 of the
Columns (vi) and (vii) should be filled Comptroller and Auditor General of
in and attested by the Gazetted India (Duties, Powers and Conditions
Officer concerned as soon as the bill is of Service) Act, 1971, if the Grants or
ready. The bill should then be loans to the institution in a financial
submitted to the Gazetted Officer year are not less than Rupees twenty-
nominated to act as Drawing and five lakhs and also not less than
Disbursing Officer with the register for seventy-five percent of the total
signing the bill and to the sanctioning expenditure of the Institution. The
authority for giving dated initials in accounts may also be audited by the
column (viii) of Register. It should also Comptroller and Auditor General of
be the duty of the sanctioning India if the Grants or loans in a
authority to verify that the conditions, financial year are not less than Rupees
if any, attached to the Grant have one crore. Where the accounts are so
been duly accepted by the Grantee audited by the Comptroller and
without any reservation and that no Auditor General of India in a financial
other bill for the same purpose has year, he shall continue to audit the
already been paid before. No bill accounts for a further period of two
should be signed unless it has been years notwithstanding that the
noted in the Register of Grants against conditions outlined above are not
the relevant sanction. This will also fulfilled.
facilitate watching of payments in (ii) Where any Grant and /or loan is given
instalments, if any, in the case of lump for any specific purpose to any
sum sanctions. Institution or Organisation or
73
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
authority, not being a foreign State or quantified and qualitative targets that
international Body/Organization, the should have been reached against the
Comptroller and Auditor General is amount utilised, were in fact reached, and
competent under Section 15 (1) of the if not, the reasons therefor. They should
CAG’s (DPC) Act, 1971, to scrutinize contain an output based performance
the procedures by which the assessment instead of input based
sanctioning authority satisfies itself as performance assessment. The Utilization
to the fulfillment of the conditions Certificate should be submitted within
subject to which such Grants and/or twelve months of the closure of the
loans were given and shall, for this financial year by the Institution or
purpose, have right of access to the Organisation concerned. Receipt of such
books and accounts of that Institute or certificate shall be scrutinised by the
Organisation or authority. Ministry or Department concerned. Where
Rule 236 (3) In all other cases, the Institution or such certificate is not received from the
Organisation shall get its accounts audited Grantee within the prescribed time, the
from Chartered Accountants of its own Ministry or Department will be at liberty to
choice. blacklist such Institution or Organisation
from any future grant, subsidy or other type
Rule 236 (4) Where the Comptroller and Auditor
of financial support from the Government.
General of India is the sole auditor for a
local Body or Institution, auditing charges Rule 238 (2) In respect of recurring Grants, Ministry
will be payable by the auditee Institution in or Department concerned should release
full unless specifically waived by any amount sanctioned for the subsequent
Government financial year only after Utilization
Certificate in respect of Grants of
Rule 237 Time Schedule for submission of
preceding financial year is submitted.
annual accounts. The dates prescribed
Release of Grants-in-aid in excess of
for submission of the annual accounts for
seventy five per cent of the total amount
Audit leading to the issue of Audit
sanctioned for the subsequent financial
Certificate by the Comptroller and Auditor
year shall be done only after utilisation
General of India and for submission of
certificate and the annual audited
annual report and audited accounts to the
statement relating to Grants-in-aid
nodal Ministry for timely submission to the
released in the preceding year are
Parliament are listed below:-
submitted to the satisfaction of the
(I) Approved and authenticated annual
Ministry/Department concerned. Reports
accounts to be made available by the
submitted by the Internal Audit parties of
Autonomous Body to the concerned
the Ministry or Department and Inspection
Audit Office and commencement of
Reports received from Indian Audit and
audit of annual accounts-30th June
Accounts Department and the
(ii) Issue of the final SAR in English version performance reports if any received for the
with audit certificate to Autonomous third and fourth quarter in the year should
Body/ Government concerned also be looked into while sanctioning
-31st October further Grants.
(iii) Submission of the Annual Report and Rule 238 (3) Utilization certificates need not be
Audited Accounts to the Nodal for it to furnished in cases where the Grants -in
be laid on the Table of the Parliament –aid / CFA are being made as
-31st December reimbursement of expenditure already
Rule 238 (1) Utilization Certificates. In respect of incurred on the basis of duly audited
non-recurring Grants to an Institution or accounts. In such cases the sanction letters
Organisation, a certificate of actual should specify clearly that the Utilization
utilization of the Grants received for the Certificates will not be necessary.
purpose for which it was sanctioned in Rule 238 (4) In respect of Central Autonomous
Form GFR 12-A, should be insisted upon Organisations, the Utilization Certificate
in the order sanctioning the Grants-in-aid. shall disclose separately the annual
The Utilization Certificate in respect of expenditure incurred and the funds given
Grants referred to in Rule230 (10) should to suppliers of stores and assets, to
also disclose whether the specified, construction agencies, to staff for (House
74
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Building and Purchase of conveyance) UC should be counter-signed by the
which do not constitute expenditure at that Administrative Secretary of the Division
stage but have been met out of Grants and regulating the Scheme/Finance Secretary.
are pending adjustments. These shall be Rule 240 State Government to submit Utilization
treated as unutilized Grants allowed Certificate when expenditure incurred
to be carried forward. While recording the through local bodies. When Central
Grants in the subsequent year the amount Grants are given to State Governments for
carried forward shall be taken into expenditure to be incurred by them
account. through local bodies or private institutions,
Rule 238 (5) In the case of Private and Voluntary the Utilization Certificates should be
Organizations receiving recurring Grants- furnished by the State Government
in-aid from Rupees ten lakhs to less than concerned.
Rupees fifty lakhs, all the Ministries or Rule 241 Utilisation Certificate in case of Direct
Departments of Government of India Benefit Transfer (DBT) Scheme. In case
should include in their Annual Report a of the schemes covered under Direct
statement showing the quantum of funds Benefit Transfers (DBT), where the fund
provided to each of those organizations flow is directly from the Central
and the purpose for which they were Government to the beneficiaries, the
utilized, for the information of Parliament. intimation from the bank/National
The Annual Reports and accounts of Payments Corporation of India (Aadhaar
Private and Voluntary Organizations Payment Bridge) regarding deposit of the
receiving recurring Grants-in-aid to the funds in the beneficiaries’ bank accounts,
tune of Rupees fifty lakhs and above generated as per procedure prescribed by
should be laid on the Table of the House the Controller General of Accounts, may
within nine months of the close of the be treated as a Utilization Certificate. The
succeeding financial year of the Grantee Ministry/Department releasing the Grant
Organisations. should keep proper record and accounts
Rule 238 (6) In the case of organizations receiving relating to such direct releases under DBT
one-time assistance or non recurring to the beneficiaries bank accounts.
Grants as Grants-in-aid from Rupees ten Rule 242 (1) Performance parameters.
lakhs to Rupees fifty lakhs, all Ministries or Performance parameters should be clearly
Departments of Government of India set to allow better oversight of the
should include in their Annual Reports, Autonomous Body.
statements showing the quantum of funds
Rule 242 (2) Submission of Achievement-cum-
provided to each of these organizations
Performance Reports.
and the purpose for which the funds were
i. The Grantee Institutions or
utilized, for the information of Parliament.
Organisations should be required to
The Annual Reports and Audited Accounts
submit performance cum
of Private and Voluntary Organizations or
achievement reports soon after the
societies registered under the Registration
end of the financial year, and in any
of Societies Act, 1860, receiving one-time
case, not later than six months after
assistance/non-recurring Grants of
the close of the financial year.
Rupees fifty lakhs and above should also
be laid on the Table of the House, within ii. In regard to non-recurring Grants
nine months of the close of the succeeding such as those meant for celebration of
financial year of the grantee anniversaries, conduct of special tours
Organisations. and maintenance Grants for
education, performance-cum-
Rule 239 State Government to submit Utilization
achievement reports need not be
Certificate for Grants-in-aid relating
obtained.
to Scheme. When Central Grants are
given to State Governments for iii. In the case of recurring Grants,
implementation of Central Scheme, submission of achievement-cum-
Utilization Certificate in format GFR 12-C performance reports should usually
may be submitted by the State be insisted upon in all cases. However,
Government in respect of the Scheme. The in the case of Grants-in-aid not
75
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
exceeding Rupees twenty five lakhs, or sanctioning authority is conducted
the sanctioning authority may or when it is called for by the
dispense with the submission of Accountant General.
performance-cum-achievement Rule 243 Discretionary Grants. When an
reports and should, in that event, refer allotment for Discretionary Grants is
to the Utilization Certificates and placed at the disposal of a particular
other information available with it to authority, the expenditure from such
decide whether or not the Grants-in- Grants shall be regulated by general or
aid should continue to be given. special orders of the competent authority
iv. (a) The Annual Reports and Audited specifying the object for which the Grants
Statements of Accounts of can be made and any other condition(s)
Autonomous Organisations are that shall apply to them. Such
required to be laid on the table of Discretionary Grants must be non-
the Parliament. In such cases, the recurring and not involve any future
Ministries or Departments of commitment.
Central Government need not Rule 244 Other Grants. Grants, subventions, etc.,
incorporate performance-cum- including Grants to States other than those
achievement reports in the dealt with in the foregoing rules, shall be
Annual Reports. made under special orders of
(b) In all other cases, if the Grants-in- Government.
aid exceed Rupees ten lakhs but Rule 245 (i) Regulation of recurring Grants-in-aid
less than rupees fifty lakhs, the for Government employees’ welfare :–
Ministry or Departments of the
a. Grants-in-aid for provision of
Central Government should
amenities or of recreational or welfare
include a statement in their
facilities to the staff of the offices of the
Annual Report of their own
Government are regulated under
assessment of the achievements
orders of the Ministry of Home Affairs
or performance of the Institution
issued from time to time. The
or Organisations.
admissibility of the Grants-in-aid for
(c) In cases where the Grants-in-aid the welfare of the employees of the
are for Rupees fifty lakhs or more, Government should be regulated in
the Ministry or Departments of the the following manner :-
Central Government should
i. The Grant in aid will be admissible on
include in their Annual Report a
the basis of the total strength borne on
review of the utilization of the
the regular strength of an
Grants-in-aid individually,
organization, i.e., Ministry or
specifying in detail the
Department, etc., and its Attached and
achievements vis-à-vis the
Subordinate Offices and such
amount spent, the purpose and
statutory bodies whose budget forms
destination of Grants.
part of Consolidated Fund of India,
v. Where the accounts of the Grantee irrespective of the fact whether any
Institutions or Organisations are individual is a member of the staff
audited by the CAG of India copies of club, etc., or not. However, Grant-in-
the performance-cum-achievement aid in respect of Gazetted Officers will
reports, furnished by the grantee be admissible only to that Ministry or
Institution to the Administrative Department or Office where
Ministry or sanctioning authority membership of recreation club is open
should be made available to audit. In to such officers.
other cases copies of such reports,
Staff paid from contingencies, work-
received by the Departments of the
charged staff etc., will not be taken
Central Government or the
into calculation for this purpose. Staff
sanctioning authority should be made
eligible for similar concession under
available to audit when local audit of
some other rule or statutory provision,
such Grants-in-aid in the
e.g., industrial workers will also not be
Administrative Ministry or Department
covered by these orders.
76
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ii) Amounts of Grants-in-aid. (a) The rate fifty thousand may be sanctioned for
of the Grant-in-aid will be Rupees fifty setting up of a Recreation Club.
per head per annum. In addition to 3. Grants-in-aid to the Ministry or
this, an additional Grant-in-aid up to Departments of the Central
Rupees twenty-five per head per Government and their Attached and
annum to match the subscriptions Subordinate Offices will be allocated
collected during the previous financial by the concerned Ministry or
year by the existing staff clubs will be Department on receipt of formal
admissible. In the case of staff clubs requests in the prescribed manner. For
which are started during the financial the purposes of these Grants-in-aid,
year in which Grant-in-aid is to be the Departments of the Central
given, an additional matching grants- Government and their attached and
in-aid up to Rupees twenty-five per Subordinate Offices will be treated as
head per annum, to match the a single unit. It will be the responsibility
subscription collected by such clubs up of that Ministry or Department to
to the date on which the proposal for distribute the amount further to its
the Grant is mooted, may be Attached and Subordinate Offices and
sanctioned. The total strength of the to their different clubs. The accounts of
eligible staff will be that existing on the these clubs for the preceding year duly
thirty-first March of the previous audited by an Internal Auditor should
financial year or that on the date on be obtained immediately after the
which proposal for Grant is mooted in close of the financial year in any case
the case of new staff clubs above by the thirtieth April by the Ministry or
rates, as revised from time to time will Department before allocating funds
apply. for the next financial year.
iii) An illustrative list of items on which 4. Grants-in-aid for the provision of
expenditure can be incurred out of amenities or recreational or welfare
Grants-in-aid sanctioned by facilities to the staff of the Indian Audit
Government for provision of and Accounts Department are
amenities is given below: regulated by separate orders
i) Articles of sports – Outdoor and
indoor games equipment
II. LOANS
ii) Cost of uniforms, etc., supplied to
teams of players.
Rule 246 The rules in this Section shall be observed
iii) Magazines and periodicals.
by all authorities competent to sanction
iv) Entry fee for tournaments loans of public moneys to State
v) Hiring of playgrounds Governments, Local Administrations of
vi) Hiring and repair for furniture, Union Territories, local bodies, foreign
etc., Government on specific recommendation
of State Government, Government
vii) Purchase of furniture.
institutions and other Government bodies.
viii) Conveyance expenses incurred
Rule 247 (1)Powers and Procedure for sanction
locally.
of loans. The powers of Departments
ix) Entertainments.
of the Central Government and
x) Prizes. Administrators as well as other
xi) Film shows. subordinate authorities to sanction loans
are given in the Delegation of Financial
xii) Hiring of accommodation for
Powers Rules and other general and
Club/Association, etc.
special orders issued under that rule.
xiii) Cultural, Sports and Physical
Rule 247 (2) Nodal Division in Ministry of
development programme(s).
Finance. The Budget Division,
xiv) Inter-Ministerial meets.
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry
xv) Inter-Departmental meets
of Finance shall be the nodal division in the
2. A maximum one time Grant of Rupees Ministry of Finance to finalise terms and
conditions of loans by the Central
Government.
77
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Rule 248 All sanctions of loans issued by a date by fourteen days or less, interest
Department of Central Government or an for the full period (half-year or full
Administrator of Union Territory in exercise year, as the case may be) shall be
of their powers under the relevant payable.
provision of Delegation of Financial (v) When the due date of repayment of
Powers Rules shall include a certificate to any instalment of principal or interest
the effect that the same is in accordance falls on a Sunday or a public holiday,
with the rules or principles prescribed by the payment made on the next
the Ministry of Finance and that the rate of working day following the Sunday or
interest on the loan and the period of the public holiday, shall be regarded
repayment thereof have been fixed with as payment on the due date and no
the approval of that Ministry. interest shall be charged for the day or
Rule 249 (1) All sanctions to loans shall be subject to days by which the recovery is so
the Delegation of Financial Powers Rules postponed.
and shall specify the terms and conditions Exception. If an instalment of
relating to them including the terms and principal or interest is payable on the
conditions of their repayment and thirty-first March of a year, and if that
payment of interest. day happens to be a public holiday the
Rule 249 (2) Borrowers shall be required to adhere recoveries shall be made on the
strictly to the terms settled for the loans immediately preceding working day.
made to them. Modifications of these In case, the due date for the
terms can be made subsequently only for repayment of a loan or payment of
very special reasons and after seeking interest falls on a holiday observed by
prior concurrence of Ministry of Finance. the Reserve Bank of India, at which the
Rule 250 (1) General conditions for regulating effective credit of the same is to take
all loans : All loans shall be regulated by place this shall be shifted to the next
the following general conditions :- working day, except when the due
date is thirty-first March.
(i) A specific term shall be fixed which
shall be as short as possible, within (vi) The payment of interest and the
which each loan has to be fully repaid repayment of principal of a loan are
with interest due. The terms may, in always to be made with reference to
very special cases, extend to thirty the calendar date on which the loan in
years. question is paid. However, where
payment of instalment is in advance of
(ii) The term is to be calculated from the
the due date by fourteen days or less,
date on which the loan is completely
interest for the full year or half year
drawn or declared by competent
(depending on the prescribed mode of
authority to be closed.
recovery) shall be charged thereon. In
(iii) The repayment of loans shall be
the case of a loan sanctioned by the
effected by instalments, which shall
Central Government to a State
ordinarily be fixed on annual basis,
Government on or before thirty-first
and with due dates of payment being
March of a year, which is adjusted in
specially prescribed.
the books of the Reserve Bank of India
(iv) Any instalment paid before its due in the month of April but in the
date may be taken entirely towards accounts of the previous year the
the principal, provided it is instalment of principal and/or interest
accompanied by payment toward shall fall due for payment on the thirty-
interest due up-to-date of actual first March of the succeeding year and
payment of instalment; if not, the not on the anniversaries of the
amount of the instalment shall first be calendar date in April on which the
adjusted towards the interest due for inter-Governmental adjustment was
preceding and current periods and carried out.
the balance, if any, shall alone be
(vii) The date of drawal of a loan by a State
applied towards the principal. If,
Government shall be determined as
however, the payment of the
indicated below –
instalment is in advance of the due
78
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(a) When monetary settlement is payment of loan, the Principal
involved-Normally the calendar Accounts Officers or Pay and Accounts
date on which amount of a loan is Officers who maintain the detailed
actually credited to the account of accounts of loans, shall issue notices in
the State Government by the Form GFR-19 to the loanees (other
Reserve Bank is to be treated as than State and Union Territory
the date of its drawal. Governments) i.e. Public Sector
This position shall also hold in Undertakings, statutory bodies and
cases where adjustment in Government institutions etc., say, a
accounts is made in one month month in advance of the due date for
but date of adjustment in the the repayment of any instalment of the
books of the Reserve Bank of India principal and/ or interest thereon.
falls in the following calendar However, omission to give notice does
month. The calendar date on not give the loanees any claim to
which the credit is actually exemption from the consequences of
afforded to the State Government default in the repayment of the
in the books of the Reserve Bank principal and/or interest thereon.
of India in such cases shall be Rule 250 (2) Before sanctioning a loan to private
treated as the date of its drawal. Institutions the lending Ministry or
Exception. An exception to this Department shall examine the financial
arrangement is in the case of health and managerial ability of such
loans for which credit is afforded institutes.
to the recipient State Government Rule 250 (3) (i) Before considering a loan
in the month of April by the application from parties other than
Reserve Bank of India but in the State Governments and Local
accounts of previous year. In such Administrations of Union Territories,
cases, a loan shall be deemed to the following requirements shall be
have been paid on the thirty-first fulfilled:-
March of the financial year in the (a) it shall be seen that there is
accounts for which the payment is adequate budget provision;
adjusted. Consequently, payment
(b) it shall be seen whether the grant
of annual interest as also
of the loan is in accordance with
repayment of instalment of
approved Government policy and
principal in respect of such loans
accepted patterns of assistance.
shall fall due on the thirty-first
(ii) Before approving the loan, the
March of the succeeding years
applicant shall be asked to furnish the
and not on the anniversaries of
following materials and information:-
the calendar date in April on
which inter-Governmental (a) copies of profit and loss (or
adjustment on account of such income and expenditure)
loans was carried out in the books accounts and balance sheets for
of the Reserve Bank of India. the last 3 years;
(b) Where no monetary settlement is (b) the main sources of income and
involved.–In regard to cases how the loan is proposed to be
where adjustment in the books of repaid within the stipulated
the Accounts Offices are only period;
involved and actual credit through (c) the security proposed to be
the Reserve Bank of India is not offered for the loan together with a
necessary, the last date of the valuation of the security offered by
month of account in which the an independent authority and a
adjustment is effected shall be certificate to the effect that the
taken as the date of drawal of asset offered as security is not
loan for purposes of repayment already encumbered.
and charging interest.
(d) Details of loan or loans taken from
(viii)In order to avoid any default in the the Central Government or a State
79
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Government in the past, not included;
indicating amount, purpose, rate (b) that as far as possible, the scheme
of interest, stipulated period of for which the loan is given is self-
repayment, date of original loan financing and does not throw an
and amount outstanding against additional burden on the general
the loan(s) on the date of the income of the institutions, e.g., in
application and the assets, if any, the case of hostels for colleges
given as security; that the rents proposed are
(e) a complete list of all other loans, adequate;
outstanding on the date of (c) the Institution produces an
application and the assets given undertaking from the State
as security against them; Government or the Management
(f) the purpose for which the loan is that any shortfall towards
proposed to be utilized and the repayment of the loan and
economics of the scheme. interest shall be made good by it.
NOTE. Where the loan is to be given to In the latter case the financial
Government institution on the strength of a position of the Management
guarantee given by the trust managing it, (Trust) shall be investigated after
similar information should be called for in calling for information on the
respect of the trust also. lines of Rule 250. (3) (i) above.
(iii) On receipt of the information called (v) Ministries or Departments of the
for as mentioned in (ii) above, Central Government shall lay down a
confidential enquiries shall be made procedure for periodical review of the
from the other Departments of the old loans so that prompt action can be
Central Government or State taken, if necessary, for enforcing
Governments from which the party regular payments.
has taken loans, to judge the Rule 250 (4) The detailed procedure to be followed
performance in regard to the previous in connection with the Grant of loans to
loans. If the replies indicate that the local bodies shall be regulated by the
performance was not satisfactory, the provisions of the Local Authorities Loans
loan shall be refused. It must be Act and other special Acts and by rules
analysed that the financial position of made thereunder.
the party is sound. It shall also be Rule 251 (1) Interest on Loans.
ensured that the security offered is
Interest shall be charged at the rate
adequate and its value is at least
prescribed by the Government for any
thirty-three and one-third per cent.
particular loan or for the class of loans
above the amount of the loan. If
concerned.
possible, an independent valuation of
Rule 251 (2) A loan shall bear interest for the day of
the security offered shall be obtained.
payment but not for the day of repayment.
The applicant for the loan must satisfy
Interest for any shorter period than a
both the criteria for financial
complete year shall be calculated as
soundness and adequacy of security
follows, unless any other method of
before a loan is sanctioned.
calculation is prescribed in any particular
(iv) In the case of Institutions which receive
case or class of cases.
Grants-in-aid from Government to
Number of days X Yearly rate of interest
meet a part of their deficits and the
balance is met by the State 365 (366 in case of a leap year)
Government and the Trustees of Rule 252 (1) Procedure to be followed for
Management, it shall be ensured– recovery of loans and interest thereon
(a) that in computing the deficit for and Grant of moratorium. The
purpose of the Grant-in-aid, the instructions issued by the Ministry of
income from the scheme, if any, Finance from time to time prescribing the
earmarked for servicing the loan interest rates and other terms and
and the instalment of repayment conditions of loans to State and Union
of the loan and interest (if any) is Territory Governments, Local Bodies,
80
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Statutory Corporations, financial, obtained from the loanee before the
industrial and commercial undertakings in drawal of the amount of loan and a
the Public Sector shall be strictly followed. certificate that the undertaking has
Rule 252 (2) The recovery of loans shall ordinarily been obtained, shall be recorded by
be effected in annual equal instalments of the Drawing Officer of the office of the
principal together with interest due on the sanctioning authority in the bill for
outstanding amount of principal from time drawal of the amount of loan. The
to time. The repayment and interest sanction in respect of loans to other
instalments may be rounded off to the organizations, where a formal
nearest rupee subject to final adjustment agreement is required to be executed,
at the time of payment of last instalment of shall also be issued in the same
principal and/or interest. manner.
Rule 252 (3) A suitable period of moratorium Rule 254 Undertaking to be obtained from
towards repayment might be agreed to in wholly-owned Government
individual cases having regard to the Companies.
projects for which the loans are to be In the case of loans to wholly-owned
utilized. However, no moratorium shall Government Companies, a written
ordinarily be allowed in respect of interest undertaking to the effect that the fixed
payable on loans. assets of the company shall not be
Rule 253 (1) Loans to State and Union Territory hypothecated without prior approval of the
Governments, Local Bodies, Statutory Government shall be obtained in Form
Corporations, Public Sector GFR 32. No stamp duty need be paid on
Undertakings, etc. L o a n s s h a l l these written undertakings.
ordinarily be sanctioned at the normal Rule 255 Loans to parties other than State
rates of interest prescribed by Government Governments, wholly owned Government
for the particular category of the loanee. In Companies and Local Administration of
cases where the normal rate is considered Union Territories shall be sanctioned only
too high and a concession is justified, it against adequate security. The security to
shall take the form of direct subsidy be taken shall ordinarily be at least thirty-
debitable to the grants of the sanctioning three and one-third per cent. more than
authority. In such cases interest shall, the amount of the loan. However, a
however, be paid by the borrower in the competent authority may accept security of
first instance at the normal rates and less value for adequate reasons to be
subsidy shall be claimed separately. recorded.
Rule 253 (2) Agreements and other Rule 256 (1) Submission of Utilization
documentation. Certificate, Reports, Statements, etc. In
(i) In the case of loans to parties other cases in which conditions are attached to
than State Governments and wholly the utilization of loan, either in the shape of
owned Government Companies, a the specification of the particular objects
loan agreement specifying all the on or the time within which the money must
terms and conditions shall be be spent or otherwise, the authority
executed. A clause shall invariably be competent to sanction the loan shall be
inserted in all such agreements primarily responsible for certifying to the
enabling Government at any time to Accounts Officer where necessary, the
call for accounts of the applicant fulfilment of the conditions attaching to the
relating to any accounting year with loan, unless there is any special rule or
power to depute an officer specially order to the contrary. The loans sanctioned
authorized for this purpose to inspect to the State Governments and the Local
the applicant’s books, if necessary. Administration of Union Territories shall
not, however, come within the purview of
(ii) A written undertaking in Form GFR 15
this rule.
shall be obtained from a wholly
Government-owned company at the Rule 256 (2)
time of sanctioning the loan. The (i) The certificate referred to in Rule 256
sanction shall specifically state that (1) above shall be furnished as in Form
such an undertaking would be GFR 12-B and at such intervals as may
81
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
be agreed to between the Audit Utilization Certificates need not be
Officer and/or the Accounts Officer, furnished to the Accounts Officer. The
as the case may be, and the Ministry Certificate shall indicate the year-wise
or Department concerned. Before and object-wise break-up of loans
recording the certificate, the certifying disbursed and the loans for which
officer shall take steps to satisfy Utilizations Certificates are furnished.
himself that the conditions, on which The utilization certificate shall also
the loan was sanctioned, have been show the loans disbursed separately
or are being fulfilled. For this purpose, for each sub-head of account to
he may require the submission to him facilitate verification by the Accounts
at suitable intervals of such reports, Officer.
statements, etc., which shall establish (v) The Utilization Certificates shall be
the utilization of loan for the purpose furnished within a ‘reasonable time’
for which it was sanctioned. The after the loan is paid to the institutions.
loanee institution may also be The Department of Central
required to furnish a certificate from Government shall prescribe, in
its Auditors that the conditions consultation with the Ministry of
attaching to the loan have been or are Finance, target dates for the
being fulfilled. The certificate shall submission of the Utilization
give details of the breaches, if any, of Certificates by the Department
those conditions. concerned to the Accounts Officer. The
(ii) A Certificate of Utilization of the loan target date shall, as far as possible, be
shall be furnished to the Accounts not later than eighteen months from
Officer in every case of loan made for the date of sanction of the loan.
specific purposes, even if of the any (vi) In respect of loans, the detailed
conditions is not specifically attached accounts of which are maintained by
to the grant. Such certificates are not, Departmental Officers and where
however, necessary in cases where consolidated Utilization Certificates
loans are sanctioned not for any are to be furnished to Accounts
specific purpose or object but take the Officer, the period of 18 months shall
shape of a temporary financial aid or be reckoned from the expiry of the
where the loans have been financial year in which the loans are
sanctioned to the Public Sector disbursed. The consolidated
Undertakings intended for financing Utilization Certificates in respect of
of their approved capital outlays. The such loans paid each year shall,
repayment of loan, however, has to be therefore, be furnished not later than
watched in the usual manner. September of the second succeeding
(iii) In respect of loans the detailed financial year.
accounts of which are maintained in (vii) The due dates for submission of the
the Audit Offices, the authorities Utilization Certificates shall be
sanctioning the loan shall furnish the specified in the letter of sanction for
Utilization Certificate in respect of loan. The target date as specified shall
each individual case. be rigidly enforced and extension shall
(iv) Where the detailed accounts of the only be allowed in very exceptional
loans are maintained by the circumstances in consultation with the
Departmental authorities, a Ministry of Finance under intimation to
consolidated Utilization Certificate the Audit Officer and/or the Accounts
shall be furnished to Audit by the Officer, as the case may be. No further
Ministries/Departments sanctioning loans shall be sanctioned unless the
the loans to Institutions/ sanctioning authorities are satisfied
Organisations for the total amount of about the proper utilization of the
the loans disbursed during each year earlier loan sanctioned to an
for different purposes including the Institution, etc.
loans sanctioned by their subordinate Rule 257 Instalments of Loans. When a loan of
officers. This certificate shall not cover public money is taken out in instalments,
the loans to individuals for which each instalment of the loan so drawn shall
82
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
be treated as a separate loan for purposes agreements in all other cases shall
of repayment of principal and payment of invariably stipulate a higher rate of interest
interest thereon except where the various and provide for lower rate of interest in the
instalments drawn during a financial year case of punctual payments. The penal or
are, for this purpose, allowed to be the higher rate of interest, as the case may
consolidated into a single loan as at the be, shall not, except under special orders
end of that particular financial year. In the of Government, be less than two and half
latter event, simple interest at the per cent per annum above the normal rate
prescribed rate on the various loan of interest prescribed by Government from
instalments from the date of drawal of time to time for the loans advanced.
each instalment to the date of their Rule 258 (2) Any default in the payment of interest
consolidation shall be separately payable upon a loan or in the repayment of
by the borrower. Repayment of each loan principal, shall be promptly reported by the
or the consolidated loan, as the case may Accounts Officer, to the authority which
be, and the payment of interest thereon sanctioned the loan. The responsibility of
shall be arranged by the borrower the Accounts Officer, under this rule refers
annually on or before the anniversary date only to the loans, the detailed accounts for
of drawal or consolidation of the loan in which are kept by him.
such number of instalments as the
Rule 258 (3) Procedure to be followed in case of
sanctioning authority may prescribe. The
defaults in repayment of interest free loans
sanctioning authority may allow, in
or loans sanctioned at concessional rates
deserving cases a moratorium towards
of interest :
repayment of principal but not for the
(i) In the case of grant of interest free
payment of interest. Should it appear that
loans e.g., loans to technical
there is an undue delay on the part of the
educational institutions for
debtor in taking out the last instalment of a
construction of hostels, prompt
loan the authority sanctioning the loan
repayment shall be made a condition
may at any time declare that loan closed,
for the grant of interest free loans. The
and order repayment of capital to begin.
sanction letter in such cases shall
The Accounts Officer shall bring to notice
provide that in the event of any default
any delay that appears to him to require
in repayment, interest at rates
this remedy and he shall take this step
prescribed by Government from time
whether or not there are any dates fixed for
to time will be chargeable on the
taking of instalments.
loans.
NOTE 1. These instructions are applicable
(ii) In the case of loans sanctioned at
mutatis mutandis to loans, the repayments
concessional rates of interest the
of which are made by other than annual
difference between the normal rate
instalments.
and concessional rate), shall be made
NOTE 2. It must be remembered that the
conditional upon prompt repayments
calculation fixing the amount of equal
of principal and payment of interest
periodical instalments, by which a loan is
thereon by the entity concerned.
repaid with interest, presupposes punctual
(iii) In the cases where in addition to
payment of the instalment and that, if any
interest free loans, subsidy is also
instalment is not punctually repaid, the
provided to meet running expenses
interest amount shall need to be
the sanction letter shall provide that in
recalculated.
the event of any default in repayment,
Rule 258 (1) Defaults in Payment. The loan
the defaulted dues would be
sanctions in favour of State or Union
recovered out of the subsidy payable.
Territory Governments and the loan
Rule 258 (4) On receipt of a report of default
sanctions or undertakings or agreements
referred to in sub-rule (2) above, the
in case of wholly Government owned
authority concerned shall immediately
companies or Public Sector Undertakings
take steps to get the default remedied and
shall invariably include provision for the
also consider enforcement of penal or
levy of penal interest on overdue
higher rate of interest on the overdue
instalments of interest or principal and
amounts. Where the sanctioning authority
interest. The loan sanctions and
83
Chapter – 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
is satisfied, having regard to the view to enforce repayments of the
circumstances of the case, that penal or principal and interest due.
higher interest need not be recovered, the The Administrative Ministries shall keep
borrower shall ordinarily be asked to pay watch over the receipt of the Annual
interest, at the normal rate prescribed in Statements in Form GFR 20 regularly from
the loan sanction, on the overdue amount the Accounts Officer and conduct a close
(of principal and/or interest) from the due review of the cases of defaults in
date of payment up to the date of repayment of the instalments of principal
settlement of the default. The recovery of and/or interest due, as revealed from these
additional interest shall not be waived Annual Statements and take suitable
except in special circumstances or where measures for enforcing repayments of the
the period of defaults is very short, e.g., a principal and interest due. If these
few days. statements are not received in time, the
Rule 259 Irrecoverable Loans. A competent Accounts Officer shall be reminded
authority, after prior approval of the promptly. To facilitate a proper review of
Ministry of Finance may remit or write off the position of outstanding loans, the
any loans owing to their irrecoverability or Ministries may also arrange to maintain
otherwise. centrally a list of all sanctions issued
Rule 260 Accounts and Control. Subject to such relating to loans advanced to State
general or specific directions as may be Governments and other entities.
given by the Comptroller and Auditor- Rule 263 (2) Submission of Annual Assessment
General in this behalf, detailed accounts Report.
of loans to Institutions and Organizations, A copy of Annual Assessment Report on
etc., shall be maintained by the Accounts status of all outstanding loans, including
Officer who shall watch their recovery and timely and accurate payment of principal
see that the conditions attached to each and interest due, shall be submitted by the
loan are fulfilled. Financial Advisor of the Administrative
Rule 261 The instructions contained in this Chapter Ministry concerned to the Ministry of
relating to cost of audit of Grants-in-aid Finance by 30th June of each financial
are applicable Mutatis mutandis in the year.
case of loans as well.
Rule 262 Annual Returns.
Each Principal Accounts Officer shall
submit to the concerned Ministry or
Department of Government, a statement
in Form GFR 13 showing the details of
outstanding Central Loans borne on his
books as on thirty-first March each year.
This statement shall be submitted not later
than the following thirtieth September and
shall indicate the aggregate of
outstanding balance of loans, details of
defaults, if any, in repayment of principal
and/ or interest and the earliest period to
which the default pertains, against each
State or Union Territory Government,
foreign Government, Railway or
Department of Posts funds, Central Public
Sector and other Government Institutions
etc. Where, however, detailed accounts
are not required to be maintained by the
Accounts Office, the statement shall
contain departmental authority-wise
aggregate balances of outstanding loans.
Rule 263 (1) Review of Annual Statements with a
84
Chapter – 10
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
BUDGETING AND ACCOUNTING OF
EXTERNALLY AIDED PROJECTS
Rule 264 (1) Implementation of Projects or Rule 266 Accounting of Cash grants.Cash grants,
Schemes through external aid receipt. as distinct from commodity grant or other
The projects or schemes of the assistance in kind received from external
Government of India to be implemented sources shall be accounted for only by the
through external aid receipt from office of Controller of Aid Accounts and
multilateral or bilateral funding agencies Audit, Department of Economic Affairs.
shall be shown in the budget proposals Rule 267 Procedure for withdrawal. The
approved annually by the Parliament. concerned administrative Ministries or
Rule 264 (2) The external aid comes from bilateral Departments shall be required to make
and multilateral sources as follows: provision of funds under the relevant head
of account as ‘External Aided Component’
(i) Bilateral funding to finance specific
in their Detailed Demands for Grants for
project(s) by the funding agency(ies)
release of external aid amounts during the
under Government to Government
year to the respective Project Implementing
agreement(s); and,
Agencies. There are mainly two
(ii) Multi-lateral funding by Multi-Lateral
procedures laid down for withdrawal of
Funding Agencies, such as the World
funds from the loan or grant account:
Bank under agreement(s) between the
Rule 267 (1) Reimbursement procedure.
borrower (Government of India) and
Under the reimbursement procedure the
the Multilateral Funding Agency(ies).
Project Implementing Agency shall initially
Rule 264 (3) The Department of Economic Affairs,
spend or incur expenditure and
Ministry of Finance as the nodal agency
subsequently claim the amount from the
shall execute the legal agreement for
Funding Agency through the office of the
loans or grants from external funding
Controller, Aid Accounts. The remittances
Agency(ies). However, grant agreements
shall be accounted as External Loan or
for Technical Assistance can also be
Grant receipt in the Consolidated Fund of
executed by the beneficiary Ministries or
India. There are two ways of dealing with
Departments with the approval of Ministry
the reimbursement claims as given below:
of Finance, Department of Economic
(i) Reimbursement through Special
Affairs.
Account (Revolving Fund Scheme).
Rule 264 (4) The Office of the Controller of Aid
Under the Revolving Fund Scheme, the
Accounts and Audit (CAAA) in the
Funding Agency disburses the
Department of Economic Affairs, Ministry
estimated expenditure of four months
of Finance shall be responsible for
for the projects as initial advance to
implementing the financial covenants laid
Government of India under the
down in the agreement(s) executed by
respective loan or credit or grant
Department(s) of Government of India
agreement. Office of Controller of Aid
and the External Funding Agency(ies). A
Accounts & Audit withdraws the
copy of all such agreements shall be sent
amount specified in the agreement as
to the Office of Controller, Aid Accounts
initial deposit from the Funding
and Audit, Department of Economic
Agency, by sending a simple
Affairs for this purpose.
withdrawal application in the
Rule 265 Currency of external aid.
prescribed format after the loan is
The external aid shall flow from the declared effective. Such initial deposit
Funding Agency in foreign currency or designated in US Dollars is received by
Indian Rupees and shall be received by the Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai and
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai which Rupee equivalent shall be passed on to
shall remit the rupee equivalent to the Controller of Aid Accounts & Audit
account of Controller, Aid Accounts and through Government Foreign
Audit, Department of Economic Affairs at Transaction (GFT) advice. However,
Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi. The Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai shall
remittances shall be accounted as external maintain a loan wise proforma
loan/Grant receipts in the Consolidated account for liquidation of advance
Fund of India.
85
Chapter – 10
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
received from Funding Agency. Office and Audit and the Project Implementing
of Controller of Aid Accounts and Agency of the particulars of the payment
Audit, on receipt of reimbursement made. Office of Controller of Aid Accounts
claims from Project Implementing and Audit shall work out the rupee
Agency, shall send an advice to equivalent of the foreign currency
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai payment. This rupee equivalent shall be
advising it to debit the Special Account recovered by office of Controller of Aid
with the US Dollars equivalent of the Accounts and Audit from the Project
amount of the eligible claim. Office of Implementing Agencies or State
Controller, Aid Accounts and Audit Governments which have availed of the
shall consolidate all such claims and Direct Payment Procedure.
submit to Funding Agency for Note : In the case of Central Projects,
replenishment of Special Account. Centrally Sponsored Projects and Public
This shall be accompanied by a Sector or Financial Institutions, the
statement of debits and credits made concerned administrative Ministry or
during the period by Reserve Bank of Department shall release the fund to the
India, Mumbai and supporting Project Implementing Agency with the
documents received from the Project instruction to deposit rupee equivalent of
Implementing Agency. the foreign currency that have been
(ii) Reimbursement outside Special availed of under Direct Payment Procedure
Account: Under the reimbursement by them to the account of Controller of Aid
procedure (where there is no provision Accounts and Audit at Reserve Bank of
in the loan or credit agreement for the India, New Delhi or Branch of SBI so
Special Account or the balance in the authorised.
Special Account is ‘Nil’) office of Rule 268 (1) Fund Flow for State Projects
Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit financed from external aid source.The
shall send the reimbursement claims respective Departments of the State
received from the Project Government shall provide in the Budget
Implementing Agency direct to the such expenditure proposed to be incurred
Funding Agency after checking the under Plan Schemes during the financial
eligibility aspect. The Funding Agency year by the Project Implementing
shall disburse the eligible expenditure Agencies. These shall be in respect of State
to the borrower’s account with projects to be financed from external aid
Reserve Bank of India, Mumbai, who sources both under loan or credit and
shall pass on the Rupee equivalent to grants and eligible for disbursement from
the account of the Controller of Aid Funding Agency under Reimbursement or
Accounts and Audit at Reserve Bank of Direct Payment Procedure.
India, New Delhi by issue of
Rule 268 (2) Fund flow for State Projects under
Government Foreign Transaction
Reimbursement Procedure. The
(GFT) advice.
disbursements under the “Reimbursement
Rule 267 (2) Direct Payment Procedure. through Special Account” and
Under this procedure adopted in some “Reimbursement out side Special
cases the Funding Agency, on the request Account”, referred to in Rule 267 (i), shall
of the Project Implementing Agency be consolidated at periodical intervals
(received through Controller of Aid under each loan or credit State-wise by the
Accounts and Audit), duly supported by office of the Controller of Aid Accounts and
relevant documents, shall directly pay to Audit. The details of the same shall be sent
the contractor or supplier or consultant to Plan Finance Division of the Department
from the loan or credit or grant account. of Expenditure in the Ministry of Finance for
The Funding Agency, after satisfying itself release of funds to the respective State
as to the eligibility of the expenditure etc. Governments. The Plan Finance division of
remits the amount directly to the account Department of Expenditure in the Ministry
of the payees as per the payment of Finance shall issue sanctions for actual
instructions. The Funding Agency apprises release of the disbursement for each State.
the office of Controller of Aid Accounts A copy of such sanction shall be endorsed
86
Chapter – 10
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
to the Finance Department of the Rule 269 Fund flow for Central or Central
concerned State Government for sponsored Projects. Under the Central or
information. The office of the Chief Central sponsored project financed from
Controller of Accounts, Ministry of Finance external aid, whether loan or grant, the
shall issue the Inter-Government (IG) process of disbursement of such claims by
Advice to Reserve Bank of India, Central the Funding Agency shall be the same as
Accounts Section, Nagpur, for effecting the explained in Rule 267. The respective
release to the concerned State Ministry or Department get EAP funds
Governments. The account of the State under a separate budget head when
Government maintained at Reserve Bank Demands for Grants are passed in the
of India, Central Accounts Section, Parliament and advised by the Budget
Nagpur, shall be credited with the amount Division of the Ministry of Finance. The
so released, thus, completing the cycle of funds shall be released to Project
funds from the expenditure incurred from Implementing Agency within six weeks by
the Budget of the State till receipt of funds the administrative Ministry or Department
of such expenditure from Government of with reference to expenditure incurred by
India to the State. the Project Implementing Agency.
Rule 268 (3) Fund flow for State Projects under Rule 270 Fund flow for Public Sector or Financial
Direct Payment Procedure. Institutions. When the Project
Under Direct Payment Procedure the Implementing Agency under Loan or
claims shall be processed as mentioned in Credit Agreement is a Public Sector or
Rule 267 (ii). Office of Controller of Aid Financial Institution or Autonomous Body
Accounts and Audit shall work out the and Government of India is the Borrower,
Rupee equivalent of such Direct Payment the Administrative Ministry concerned shall
based on Reserve Bank of India buying provide in its budget funds required to be
rate applicable for the value date on which passed on to the Project Implementing
the Direct Payment was made. Office of Agency for the expenditure incurred by the
Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit shall latter under the externally aided project.
consolidate such disbursement in Rupees, The Project Implementing Agency shall
and send a list of such disbursement State- submit claims under reimbursement or
wise to Plan Finance Division of direct payment procedures to the office of
Department of Expenditure at periodical the Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit,
intervals requesting them to release the Department of Economic Affairs. The
amount to the State concerned notionally disbursement of the claims by the Funding
and recover the same for credit to Agency shall be similar as explained in
Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit’s Rule 267. The concerned administrative
account. The Plan Finance Division shall Ministry or Department releases the
issue a separate sanction for the amount amount to Project Implementing Agency
to be released to the State concerned and based on the certification of disbursement
for simultaneous recovery and credit back received from the Funding Agency as
to the account of the Controller of Aid certified by the office of the Controller of
Accounts and Audit. A copy of such Aid Accounts and Audit.
sanction shall also be endorsed to the However, where the loan is negotiated
Finance Department of the State directly by a particular Public Sector
Government concerned. The office of the Undertaking or Financial Institution, the
Chief Controller of Accounts, Ministry of funds from the Funding Agency shall flow
Finance shall advise Reserve Bank of direct to the borrowing entity.
India, Central Accounts Section, Nagpur,
Rule 271 Repayment of loans. Office of Controller
for making necessary adjustment entries
of Aid Accounts and Audit shall be
in the accounts of the State concerned
responsible for prompt repayment of
under intimation to the Finance
principal on the due date as per the
Department of the State and Controller of
agreements. The remittance of foreign
Aid Accounts and Audit. This completes
currency is arranged through designated
the cycle of funds flow in the case of direct
Public Sector Commercial Banks and
payment claims.
Reserve Bank of India. The Rupee
87
Chapter – 10
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
equivalent and the amount of foreign Department of Economic Affairs for
currency remitted shall be intimated by the making the budget provision in regard to
Banks to Controller of Aid Accounts and aid material or equipment.
Audit. The Rupee equivalent of the foreign Note : Refer to Para 4.8.1 of Civil Accounts
currency remitted is credited to the Manual and Note (1) below Major Head
respective Banks’ account maintained at ‘3606-Aid Materials and Equipments’ of
Reserve Bank of India, New Delhi, by debit List of Major and Minor Heads of Account
to Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit’s of Union and States for detail procedure of
account as per standing arrangement. On adjustment of value of the materials etc.
the receipt of the advice from Reserve received
Bank of India, New Delhi, Controller of
Aid Accounts and Audit shall debit the
concerned loan account in the
Consolidated Fund of India. The
repayment of loans shall be classified as
charged expenditure. In cases where the
funds from externally aided Projects are
further passed on as loans, the recovery of
the loan along with interest shall be the
responsibility of the respective
administrative Ministry or Department.
Rule 272 Interest Payments. Interest on external
loans shall be paid on the due date as
stipulated in the loan or credit agreements
against the budget provision made for this
purpose. Interest payments shall be
accounted for as debit under the Major
Head ‘2049-Interest Payments’ for
external loans in the Consolidated Fund of
India. The procedure for transfer of
amount shall be the same as followed in
the case of repayment of loans, referred to
in Rule 271 above. The interest payment
shall be classified as charged expenditure.
Rule 273 Accounting of exchange variation.The
exchange variation in respect of foreign
loans that have been fully repaid shall be
adjusted written off to “8680-
Miscellaneous Government Accounts -
Write off in terms of Government
Accounting Rules and the procedures
prescribed by CGA in consultation with
CAG.
Rule 274 Aid in form of materials and
equipment. In cases where materials,
equipment and other commodities,
without involving any cash inflow, are
received as aid from foreign countries, the
Funding Agency issues an advice to the
concerned Ministry or Department giving
details of materials supplied along with
the value thereof. The Ministry or
Department concerned in turn shall
intimate the details to the office of the
Controller of Aid Accounts and Audit,
88
Chapter – 11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES
Rule 275 (1) Power to Give and Limits on examine the proposal in consultation
Government Guarantees. The power with the Financial Adviser in the same
of the Union Government to give manner as a proposal for loan. While
guarantees emanates from and is subject examining the proposal the following
to such limits as may be fixed in terms of considerations shall be kept in view :-
Article 292 of the Constitution of India, the (a) Public interest which the
Fiscal Responsibility and Budget guarantee is expected to serve.
Management Act and Rules framed there
(b) Credit worthiness of the borrower
under as amended from time to time.
to ensure that no undue risk is
Rule 275 (2) In terms of the Fiscal Responsibility and involved.
Budget Management Act and Rules
(c) Terms of the borrowing shall take
framed thereunder, the Central
into account the yields as
Government shall not give guarantees
applicable on Government paper
aggregating the amount prescribed
of similar maturity.
therein.
(d) The conditions prescribed in the
Rule 275 (3) Powers to grant Government of India
guarantee order/agreement in
Guarantee, including those on external
order to ensure continued credit
borrowings, vests with the Budget Division,
worthiness of the borrower.
Department of Economic Affairs (DEA).
(iii) Risk associated with assumption of a
Rule 276 Objectives of Government
new contingent liability/guarantee
Guarantees: The sovereign guarantee is
proposal, including the probability of
normally extended for the purpose of
future payouts should be thoroughly
achieving the following objectives:
assessed by the concerned
(i) To improve viability of projects or Administrative Ministry/Department
activities undertaken by central entities or Credit Divisions of Department of
with significant social and economic Economic Affairs recommending the
benefits; proposal. Such assessment should
(ii) To enable central public sector ideally be entrusted to an independent
companies to raise resources at lower unit and should be undertaken even
interest charges or on more when it has already been decided by a
favourable terms; higher authority to provide
(iii) To fulfil the requirement in cases guarantees. The assessment should
where sovereign guarantee is a reveal an accurate picture of the
precondition for concessional loans financial condition of the entity to be
from bilateral/ multilateral agencies guaranteed; risks associated with
to central public sector implementation of the project/
companies/agencies. scheme, etc. This information would
be useful to estimate the funds needed
Rule 277 Guidelines for grant of Government of
to meet associated contingent
India Guarantee: The following
liabilities if the need should arise, in
guidelines should be followed by the
current or future budgets.
Ministries or Departments of the
Government of India for recommending (iv) After examination in the concerned
guarantee or counter guarantee.— Ministry or Department or Credit
Division of DEA, all proposals for
(i) A proposal for guarantee by
extending guarantees shall be
Government must be justified in public
referred to Budget Division, DEA for
interest such as in the case of
approval. No guarantees shall be
borrowings by central public sector
given without the approval of Budget
institutions for approved development
Division, DEA
purposes or borrowings by central
public sector undertakings from Banks (v) With a view to enable the Ministry of
for working capital and other Finance to examine cases of
purposes. Government of India guarantees and
extension thereto, all Ministries or
(ii) The Administrative Ministry/
Departments should furnish to that
Department or the credit Divisions of
Ministry, data of certain operational
Department of Economic Affairs shall
89
Chapter – 11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
parameters of the Public Sector considered necessary, the right to
Undertaking or Entity, as given in GFR verify the continued credit–worthiness
26. In case the accounts of the Central of the borrower should be ensured.
Public Sector Undertaking or Entity (xiii)Guarantees may not be proposed for
have been audited by the Comptroller pursuing low priority objectives or
& Auditor General of India, the effect programmes. Proposal for grant of
of the comments of the Comptroller & guarantee as an off-budget support
Auditor General of India on the should also be examined
Central Public Sector Undertaking’s comprehensively by the proposing
profitability should be brought out. Ministry/Department against other
Further, where BIFR targets have been alternative forms of support which
assigned or Cabinet directions issued may be more appropriate and cost-
to the Company, the actuals vis-à-vis effective. For example, in the case of
targets for the preceding three years provision of credit guarantees to
should be indicated. The data should enterprises that continually incur
be furnished in the Form GFR 26 losses as a result of government's
along with the proposal for pricing policy, budgetary subsidies or
guarantee. direct government loans may be a
(vi) Guarantees shall normally be more effective and less costly
restricted to the repayment of option.
principal and normal interest (xiv)Guarantees may not be proposed in
component of the loan. Other risks respect of Central Public Sector
shall not form part of the Enterprises whose strong financial
guarantee. credentials and high credit rating
(vii) Government guarantees will be would indicate inherent ability to
extended to only central public sector directly raise the required resources
companies/ agencies. without the support of government
(viii)Government guarantees shall not be guarantee.
provided to the private sector. Rule 278 Borrowings from multilateral agencies
(ix) Government guarantees should by Central Public Sector Undertakings.
normally not be extended for external (i) All borrowings from the multilateral
commercial borrowings. agencies by Central Public Sector
(x) Government guarantees may be Undertakings would be direct (without
given on all soft loan components of Government of India’s intermediation)
the bilateral/multilateral aid. on the terms as agreed mutually
However, guarantee shall not be between the borrower and the lender
normally given for the commercial and approved by the Government of
loan components of such aid. India. However, where such terms
involve guarantee of Government of
(xi) Government of India guarantee will
India, prior approval of the Budget
not be given in cases of grants.
Division of the Ministry of Finance may
However, if the donor insists on
be obtained.
ensuring performance, the same may
be listed as a negotiating condition for (ii) The borrowing should relate to the
getting the grant. Projects approved by the prescribed
competent authority of the Central
(xii) Appropriate conditions, may be made
Government.
by Government while giving the
guarantee e.g. period of guarantee, (iii) Wherever guarantee is to be given by
levy of fee to cover risk, representation Government of India, the borrower
for Government on the Board of shall enter into an agreement with the
Management, Mortgage or lien on Government of India for the payment
the assets, submission to Government of guarantee fee on the principal
of periodical reports and accounts, amount of the loan drawn and loan
right to get the accounts audited on outstanding from time to time.
behalf of Government etc. Even if fee, (iv) The Government of India Guarantee
representation and mortgage are not would only cover the principal amount
90
Chapter – 11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
and the normal interest. All other risks Rule 280 Execution of Government Guarantees.
including the exchange rate risk (i) Once the guarantee is approved by
would be shared between the Ministry of Finance, the guarantees
borrower and lender as per terms and will be executed and monitored by the
conditions prescribed in the loan Administrative Ministries concerned,
agreement. who are also required to report the
Rule 279 (1) Levy of Guarantee Fees. The rates of status in this regard on an annual
fee on guarantees would be as notified by basis till they are invoked or are
the Budget Division, Department of obliterated. The following guidelines
Economic Affairs, Ministry of Finance from need to be kept in view while issuing
time to time. The rates of guarantee fee are guarantees-
given in Appendix - 12. Ministries or a) The obligations of the borrower to
Departments shall levy the prescribed fee service the loan and the
in respect of all cases. The fees are also to guarantee, and the monitoring of
be levied in respect of non-fund based the utilization of the guaranteed
borrowings or credits (viz. letters of credit, loans, and adherence to the terms
Bank guarantees etc.). In case of any and conditions of the guarantee
doubt with regard to the categorisation of by the Borrower shall be ensured
any particular undertaking or by the Administrative Ministry/
organization or the nature of borrowing Department through a back-to-
for the purpose of levy of fee, the matter back agreement with the
may be referred to the Budget Division for borrower which may be drawn up
clarification. The Ministries or and implemented to the
Departments should also take adequate satisfaction of the Administrative
steps to ensure prompt recovery of the Ministry concerned. For this
prescribed fees. purpose, necessary records to
Rule 279 (2) The guarantee fee should be levied monitor the guarantee, including
before the guarantee is given and servicing of guarantee fee shall
thereafter on first April every year. The rate be maintained by the Line
of guarantee fee is to be applied on the Ministries/ Departments
amount outstanding at the beginning of concerned.
the guarantee year. b) Administrative Ministry should
Rule 279 (3) Where the guarantee fee is not paid on ensure that there are no
the due date, fee should be charged at inconsistencies between the
double the normal rates for the period of guarantee approval given by the
default. Ministry of Finance and the
Rule 279 (4) The Government may guarantee no guarantee agreement signed by it
more than 80% of the project loan, with the borrower. The obligations
depending on the conditions imposed by enforced by the Government as
the lender. This would incentivize the guarantor would be duly factored
lenders to make proper analysis of the in.
project, credit worthiness of the c) Deviations/modifications/
borrower(s), and build strategies for risk amendments on the main
management. In such cases, bankers/ conditions of the guarantee,
lenders may be asked to share the risk by particularly with reference to the
bearing a minimum of 20% of the net loss rate of interest on the loan to be
associated with any default. The guaranteed and obligations of
arrangement would ensure that the the Government to be covered,
lenders undertake a more rigorous should not be referred in a routine
assessment of the risk exposure. manner to Budget Division for
Provided further that in certain exceptional clarification/ change. The
circumstances, the Government of India Administrative Ministry
may guarantee 100% of the financing concerned shall make out a
where the organisation concerned is separate case, fully justifying the
discharging some function on behalf of the need for considering any
Government of India. proposed modifications/
amendments, after thorough
91
Chapter – 11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
scrutiny of the request of the monitoring or review undertaken should
borrower for the same, before examine whether the borrower is
placing these proposals before discharging repayment obligations or
the Budget Division for a final interest obligations as per terms of the loan
decision. agreement, whether the repaying capacity
for the loan and guarantee amount is
d) In respect of bilateral and
imposed in any manner, and whether all
multilateral credit, Standard
covenants and conditions are being
format of Guarantee of the
religiously followed. The Financial Advisers
lending institutions may be
of the Ministries or Departments should
examined with a view that the
undertake these reviews. A copy of the
same are not in contradiction
review report including on timely and
with the conditions of sovereign
correct payment of guarantee fees, shall
guarantee prescribed in this
be forwarded by the Finance Advisor to the
chapter, before signing by the
Budget Division by 30th April every year for
Administrative Ministry/
the previous financial year.
Department. The guarantee
agreement may also not omit any Rule 281 (2) The Financial Adviser of the Ministries
conditions as brought out in this or Departments would be responsible for
Chapter. New conditions or ensuring that the annual reviews are
covenants, and differences, if carried out by the Ministries or
any, shall be referred to Budget Departments concerned. They shall also
Division of the Department of ensure that a register of guarantees in
Economic Affairs (DEA) for Form GFR 25 is maintained :-
concurrence. (i) to keep a record of guarantees;
e) Guarantee proposals approved (ii) to retain information required from
by the Budget Division shall have time to time in respect of guarantees;
to be executed in the same
(iii) to keep record of the annual reviews to
financial year. If the guarantee/
see that these are carried out
loan agreement is not signed in
regularly;
the same financial year as that of
(iv) to keep record of levy and recovery of
the approval of the guarantee
guarantee fee;
proposal, the guarantee
(v) to send data as contained in Form GFR
proposal shall have to be
25, duly updated every year to the
submitted again.
Budget Division in the Ministry of
f) The guarantee shall hold only for
Finance, Department of Economic
the specific purpose agreed to by
Affairs by tenth of April.
the Budget Division.
Rule 281 (3) In respect of guarantees issued by the
g) Guarantee given by Government
Ministry of Finance for external loans, the
of India shall be non-
respective credit divisions of Department of
transferrable and would cease to
Economic Affairs shall conduct an annual
exist in case the ownership of the
review in consultation with the Financial
entity is transferred from
Adviser (DEA). For this purpose the
Government of India, unless the
Financial Adviser (DEA) shall ensure the
Guarantee is re-confirmed by the
maintenance of the required registers, as
Budget Division.
well as ensure that the annual reviews are
(ii) The Financial Advisers in Ministry/
carried out by the concerned credit
Department will perform the
divisions, and report forwarded to the
responsibility of maintenance of
Budget Division inForm GFR 25. In cases,
records and reporting including for
where the guarantees on external loans
the Finance Accounts and the IGAS,
are issued by the concerned administrative
through the office of Controller/Chief
Ministry, that Ministry would be responsible
Controller of Accounts.
for conducting the review.
Rule 281 (1) Review of Guarantees. All Ministries
Rule 281 (4) Classification of guarantees. For the
or Departments shall ensure that all
purpose of record keeping, guarantees
guarantees are reviewed every year. The
shall be classified asunder:-
92
Chapter – 11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(i) guarantees given to the RBI, other onward submission to Budget
banks and industrial and financial Division. Based upon the inputs, a
institutions for repayment of principal statement of Guarantees given by the
and payment of interest, cash credit Central Government is depicted as an
facility, financing seasonal annexure in the Receipt Budget.
agricultural operations and/or (ii) While furnishing the Statement of
providing working capital to guarantees to the Ministry of Finance,
companies, corporations, cooperative the Administrative Ministries or
societies and banks; Departments should ensure and certify
(ii) guarantees given for repayment of that the amounts shown tally with the
share capital, payment of minimum total figures in the statement to be
annual dividend and repayment of included in the Detailed Demands for
bonds or loans, debentures issued or grants.
raised by the statutory corporations (iii) While furnishing the summary
and central public sector statements, the Ministries or
undertakings; Departments should also certify that
(iii) guarantees given in pursuance of the information tallies with the
agreements entered into by the material furnished to the Controller
Government of India with General of Accounts for the purpose of
international financial institutions, inclusion in the Finance Accounts of
foreign lending agencies, foreign the relevant year and is compliant with
governments, contractors, suppliers, Indian Government Accounting
consultants etc., towards repayment Standard- 1 (IGAS-1) relating to
of principal, interest and/ or Government Guarantees.
commitment charges on loans etc., Rule 283 (1) Invocation of Guarantee. A
and /or for payment against supplies Guarantee Redemption Fund (GRF) has
of material and equipment; been established in the Public Account of
(iv) counter guarantees to banks in India for redemption of guarantees given
consideration of the banks having to CPSEs, Financial Institutions, etc., by the
issued letters of credit or authority to Central Government whenever such
foreign suppliers for supplies made guarantees are invoked. The funding to the
or services rendered. Guarantee Redemption Fund is to be done
(v) guarantees given to Railways for due through budgetary appropriations, as
and punctual payment of dues by considered appropriate, under the head
Central Government companies or 'Transfer to Guarantee Redemption Fund'
corporation; through the Demands for Grants of the
Department of Economic Affairs.
(vi) Others guarantees not covered under
above five classes. Rule 283 (2) The Administrative Ministries/
Departments should inform any case of
Rule 282 Accounting for Guarantees. In order to
impending/likely invocation, well in
ensure greater transparency in its fiscal
advance, to the Budget Division, along
operations in the public interest, Rule 6 of
with the proposed corrective measures.
the FRBM Rules, 2004 requires
government to publish a disclosure Rule 283 (3) In the event of invocation of a
statement on guarantees given by guarantee, the obligation may be
government, at the time of presenting the discharged by sanctioning loan to the
annual financial statement and demands borrowing entity equal to the amount of
for grants. This statement covers, inter alia, guarantee outstanding with the approval
details regarding the class and number of of Budget Division, Ministry of Finance.
guarantees, amounts guaranteed, However, any payment on this account will
outstanding, invocations, guarantee fee finally be charged to the Guarantee
payable and other material details. Redemption Fund maintained in the Public
Accounts.
(i) The statement is to be compiled by the
Administrative Ministries/
Departments and submitted to
Controller General of Accounts, for
93
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
MISCELLANEOUS SUBJECTS
I. ESTABLISHMENT
Rule 284 (1) Proposal for additions to created or vacant post or relinquishes
Establishment. charge of a post which has been
All proposals for additions to abolished.
establishment shall be submitted to (ii) Where a Gazetted government
sanctioning authority in accordance with servant vacates a post for a short
the instructions contained in Rule 11 of the period and no formal appointment or
Delegation of Financial Powers Rules and officiating arrangement is made in his
other such instructions which may be place.
prescribed in this regard. (iii) Where due to administrative
Rule 284 (2) All proposals for creation of new posts exigencies a government servant is
or a revision in an existing establishment required to move to another post
should contain, inter alia:- relinquishing his post against local
(i) the present cost of the establishment arrangement.
in existence; Rule 286 (2) In cases in which the transfer of charge
(ii) cost implications of the change involves assumption of responsibility for
proposed giving details of pay and cash, stores, etc., the following instructions
allowances of post(s) proposed; should be observed :-
(iii) expenditure in respect of claim to (i) The Cash Book or imprest account
pension or gratuity or other retirement should be closed on the date of
benefits that may arise in transfer and a note recorded in it over
consequence of the proposals; the signatures of both the relieved and
the relieving Government servants,
(iv) details on how the expenditure is
showing the cash and imprest
proposed to be met including
balances and the number of unused
proposed re-appropriations.
cheques/receipt books, if any, made
Rule 284 (3) Continuation of an existing post
over and received by them
beyond the specified duration will be with
respectively.
explicit approval of Ministry of Finance,
(ii) The relieving Government servant
based on functional justification.
should bring to notice anything
Rule 284 (4) All proposals for increase in
irregular or objectionable in the
emoluments for an existing post(s) shall be
conduct of business that may have
referred to the Ministry of Finance for
come officially to his notice to the
approval.
incoming officer.
Rule 285 All service matters from entry to exit,
(iii) In the case of any sudden casualty
including leave, transfer, promotion,
occurring or any emergent necessity
performance appraisal should be
arising for a Government servant to
maintained in a digitised format.
relinquish his charge, the next senior
Rule 286 (1) Transfer of Charge. A report of officer of the department present shall
transfer of a Gazetted Government take charge. When the person who
servant duly made in Form GFR 16 and takes charge is not a Gazetted
signed both by the relieved and relieving Government servant, he must at once
Government servants, shall be sent on the report the circumstances to his nearest
same day to the Head of the Department departmental superior and obtain
or other Controlling Officers concerned orders as to the cash in hand, if any.
except in the following types of cases in
Rule 286 (3) The additional procedure to be
respect of which report of transfer of
followed by an Audit Officer or Accounts
charge need not be signed both by the
Officer, etc., in making over charge of his
relieving and relieved Government
functions in connection with the Charitable
servants simultaneously and may be sent
Endowments and other Trust Accounts is
independently:-
laid down in Appendix – 8.
(i) Where a Gazetted Government
Rule 287 Date of Birth. Every person newly
servant assumes charge of a newly
appointed to a service or a post under
94
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Government shall, at the time of the 296 (1) should be reckoned from the date
appointment, declare the date of birth by of sanction and not from the date on which
the Christian era with confirmatory the sanction takes effect.
documentary evidence such as a Rule 290 Due date of T. A. claim. Travelling
Matriculation Certificate, where allowance claim of a government servant
prescribed qualification for appointment shall fall due for payment on the date
is Matriculation or above. In other cases succeeding the date of completion of the
Municipal Birth Certificate or Certificate journey. He shall submit the travelling
from the recognised school last attended allowance claim within sixty days of its
shall be treated as a valid document. becoming due failing which it shall stand
Rule 288 (1) Service Book. Detailed Rules for forfeited.
maintenance of Service Books are Rule 291 Reckoning the date in case of T.A. claims
contained in SRs. Service Books by retired Government servants appearing
maintained in the establishment should be in a Court of Law for defending himself.—
verified every year by the Head of Office Retired Government servants become
who, after satisfying himself that the eligible for reimbursement of Travelling
services of Government servants expenses in respect of travel(s) for
concerned are correctly recorded in each appearing in court of law for defending
Service Book shall record the following himself only when the judgement relating
certificate “Service verified from ……(the to his honorable acquittal is pronounced
date record from which the verification is by the court. In such cases the date of
made) .................................................. pronouncements of the judgement shall be
upto ……….................(date)……..…….” the reference point for submission and
Rule 288 (2) The service book of a government reimbursement of his T.A claim.
servant shall be maintained in duplicate. Rule 292 Due date of Leave Travel Concession
First copy shall be retained and claim. Leave Travel Concession claim of a
maintained by the Head of the Office and government servant shall fall due for
the second copy should be given to the payment on the date succeeding the date
government servant for safe custody as of completion of return journey. The time
indicated below :- limit for submission of the claims shall be
(i) To the existing employees - within six as under :-
months of the date on which these (i) In case advance drawn : Within thirty
rules become effective, if not already days of the due date.
given. (ii) In case advance not drawn : Within
(ii) To new appointees - within one month sixty days of the due date.
of the date of appointment. In case of (i) above if the claim is not
Rule 288 (3) In January each year the Government submitted within one month of the due
servant shall handover his copy of the date, the amount of advance shall be
Service Book to his office for updation. The recovered but the Government employee
office shall update and return it to the shall be allowed to submit the claim as
Government Servant within thirty days of under (ii) above. In case of failure to submit
its receipt. the claim in both the cases within the
Rule 288 (4) In case the Government servants’ copy prescribed time lines, the claim shall stand
is lost by the government servant, it shall forfeited.
be replaced on payment of a sum of Rs. Rule 293 Due date of Over Time Allowance
500/-. claims. A claim for overtime allowance
Rule 288 (5) All Service Books should be digitised shall fall due for payment on first day of the
for easy reference and to avoid problems month following the month to which the
in case of loss of Service Books. overtime allowance relates. The claim
shall stand forfeited if not submitted within
Rule 289 Retrospective claim due from date of
60 days of the due date.
sanction. In the case of sanction accorded
with retrospective effect the charge does Rule 294 Due date of a withheld increment. In
not become due before it is sanctioned. In the absence of any specific order
such cases the time-limit specified in Rule withholding an ordinary increment under
95
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FR 24 before the date on which it falls due sanction of the Government issued with the
for payment, the period of one year should previous consent of the Internal Finance
be counted from the date on which it falls Wing of the Ministry or Department
due and not with reference to the date on concerned.
which the Increment Certificate is signed Rule 297 Time barred claims of persons not in
by the competent authority. Even where an Government service. The provisions of
increment is withheld, the time-limit Rule 289 to Rule 296 shall apply mutatis
should be reckoned from the date on mutandis to arrear claims preferred
which it falls due after taking into account against Government by persons not in
the period for which it is withheld. Government service.
Rule 295 (1) Arrear Claims. Any arrear claim of a Rule 298 Retrospective sanctions. Retrospective
Government servant which is preferred effect shall not be given by competent
within two years of its becoming due shall authorities to sanctions relating to revision
be settled by the Drawing and Disbursing of pay or grant of concessions to
Officer or Accounts Officer, as the case Government servants, except in very
may be, after usual checks. special circumstances with the previous
Rule 295 (2) For the purpose of the above consent of the Ministry of Finance.
provisions, the date on which the claim is Rule 299 Currency of sanction of Provident Fund
presented at the office of disbursement advance/withdrawal. A sanction to an
should be considered to be the date on advance or a non-refundable part
which it is preferred. withdrawal from Provident Fund shall,
Rule 295 (3) unless it is specifically renewed, lapse on
(i) A claim of a government servant the expiry of a period of three month. This
which has been allowed to remain in will, however, not apply to withdrawals
abeyance for a period exceeding two effected in instalments. In such cases the
years, should be investigated by the sanction accorded for non-refundable
Head of the Department concerned. If withdrawals from Provident Fund will
the Head of Department is satisfied remain valid up to a particular date to be
about the genuineness of the claim on specified by the sanctioning authority in
the basis of the supporting documents the sanction order itself.
and there are valid reasons for the
delay in preferring the claims, the II. REFUND OF REVENUE
claims should be paid by the Drawing
and Disbursing Officer or Accounts
Rule 300 Sanctions of refunds of revenue. All
Officer, as the case may be, after
sanctions to refunds of revenue shall be
usual checks.
regulated by the orders of an
(ii) A Head of Department may delegate
Administrator or of the departmental
the powers, conferred on him by sub
authority, as the case may be, according to
rule (i) above to the subordinate
the provisions of the rules and orders
authority competent to appoint the
contained in the departmental manuals
Government servant by whom the
etc.
claim is made.
Rule 301 (1) Communication of refund
Rule 296 (1) Procedure for dealing with time-
sanctions to audit. The sanction to a
barred claims.
refund of revenue may either be given on
Even a time barred claim of a Government the bill itself or quoted therein and a
servant, shall be entertained by the certified copy of the same attached to the
concerned authority provided that the bill in the latter case.
concerned authority is satisfied that the
Rule 301 (2) Suitable note of refund to be made
claimant was prevented from submitting
in original Cash Book entry and other
his claim within the prescribed time limit
documents. Before a refund of revenue is
on account of causes and circumstance
made, the original demand or realization,
beyond his control.
as the case may be, must be linked and a
Rule 296 (2) A time barred claim referred to in Rule reference to the refund should be recorded
296 (1) shall be paid with the express against the original entry in the Cash Book
96
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
or other documents so as to make the and withdrawals from, the Provident Funds
entertainment of a double or erroneous established under accordance with the
claim impossible. provisions of the respective Provident Fund
Rule 301 (3) Remission of revenue before Rules. Following instructions should be
collection is not refund. Remissions of carefully observed by the Head of the
revenue allowed before collection are to Offices for correct preparation of the
be treated as reduction of demands and Provident Fund schedules:-
not as refunds. (i) A complete list of subscribers to each
Rule 301 (4) Refunds not regarded as fund should be maintained in each
expenditure for allotment. Refunds of disbursing office in the form of the
schedule.
revenues are not regarded as expenditure
for purposes of grants or appropriation. (ii) Each new subscriber should be
brought on this list and any
Rule 301 (5) Competent authority in case of
subsequent changes resulting from his
credits wrongly classified. In cases
transfer or in the rate of subscription
where revenue is credited to a wrong head
etc. clearly indicated in the schedule.
of account or credited wrongly under
some misapprehension, the authority (iii) When a subscriber dies, quits service
competent to order refund of revenue or is transferred to another office, full
shall, in such cases, be the authority to particulars should be duly recorded in
whom the original receipts correctly the list.
pertain. (iv) In the case of transfer of a subscriber
Rule 302 Compensation for accidental loss of to another office, the necessary note of
property. No compensation for transfer should be made in the list of
accidental loss of property shall be paid to both the offices.
an officer except with the approval of the (v) From this list the monthly schedule to
Ministry of Finance. Compensation will not be appended to the pay bill should be
ordinarily be granted to an officer for any prepared and tallied with recoveries
loss to his property which is caused by made before the submission of the bill
floods, cyclone, earthquake or any other for payment.
natural calamity or which is due to an Similar provisions shall also be made
ordinary accident, which may occur to any towards subscribers to New Pension
citizen, for example, loss by theft or as a System(NPS).
result of a railway accident or fire etc. The
Rule 304 (2) Crediting of Interest. The deposit
mere fact that at the time of the accident,
accounts of these funds on the
the Government servant is technically on
Government book will be credited with
duty or is living in Government quarters in
interest at such rates and at such intervals
which he is forced to reside for the
as may be prescribed by Ministry of
performance of his duties will not be
Finance in each case.
considered as a sufficient ground for the
Rule 305 (1) Maintenance of a register for
grant of compensation.
recovery of Postal Life Insurance
Premia. All drawing officers should
III. DEBT AND MISCELLANEOUS maintain in Form (GFR 20) record of Postal
OBLIGATIONS OF GOVERNMENT Life Insurance policy (PLI) holders.
Rule 305 (2) The register should be kept upto date,
Rule 303 Public Debt. The public debt raised by the names of the policy holders should be
government by issue of securities shall be noted in alphabetical order according to
managed by the Reserve Bank. The surnames, leaving sufficient space
Reserve Bank shall also manage securities between two entries to enable newcomers
created and issued under any other law or names being inserted in the right place.
rule having the force of law, provided such (i) A separate entry should be made in the
law or rule provides specifically for their register for each policy in the case of a
management by the Reserve Bank. policy holder having more than one
Rule 304 (1) Provident Funds. The procedure policy.
relating to the recovery of, subscriptions to
97
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(ii) On receipt of an intimation from the recovery was being affected previously
Director, Postal Life Insurance, but has not been affected.
Kolkata, about the issue of a policy in
favour of a subscriber authorizing the
IV. SECURITY DEPOSITS
Drawing Officer to commence
recovery from pay, or on receipt of a
Last Pay Certificate in respect of the Rule 306 (1) Furnishing of security by
subscriber transferred from another Government servants handling cash.
office, the Drawing Officer should Subject to any general or special
make a note of the particulars of the instructions prescribed by Government in
policy in the register. The name of the this behalf, every Government servant,
office from which the subscriber has who actually handles cash or stores shall
been transferred should invariably be be required to furnish security, for such
noted in the remarks column. amount and in such form as Central
Wherever a subscriber is transferred Government or an Administrator may
to another office or his policy is prescribe according to circumstances and
discharged, his name should be local conditions in each case, and to
scored out from the register giving execute a security bond setting forth the
necessary remarks. conditions under which Government will
(iii) After the preparation of the monthly hold the security and may ultimately refund
pay bill, the amount of recovery on or appropriate it.
account of PLI premium shown in the Rule 306 (2) The amount of security to be obtained
bill should be posted in the monthly from a Government servant shall be
column in the register with proper determined on the basis of actual cash
reference to the bills or the vouchers. handled which shall not include account
The fact of excess or non-recovery payee cheques and drafts.
should be briefly noted in the remarks Rule 306 (3) Security should be furnished in the form
column. Extracts should be attached of a Fidelity Bond in GFR 17, the security
to the relevant bills in support of the bond should be executed in Form GFR 14.
recoveries. While taking extracts it The Administration shall see that the
should be seen that the names of government servant pays the premia
those insurants from whom recoveries necessary to keep the Bond alive, for which
were made in previous months but no the government servant shall submit
recoveries have been made during premium receipt in time. If the government
the current month either on account of servant fails to submit the premium receipt
transfer or discharge of that policy or he shall not be allowed to perform the
on account of leave salary being not duties of his post and he shall be dealt with
drawn or the official being on leave in accordance with the terms of his
without pay, should be included in the appointment.
current month's schedule and
Rule 306 (4) A Government servant who is
necessary remarks noted against their
officiating against the post of another cash
names.
or store handling Government servant
(iv) Similarly, the remarks 'New Policy' or shall be required to furnish the full amount
Transferred from…………...…. Office of the security prescribed for the post. The
should be given in the schedule Ministry or Department of Central
against the names of insurant entered Government, Administrators and the
for the first time in current month. Comptroller and Auditor General in
Reasons for short or excess recovery respect of persons serving in Indian Audit
should be noted briefly in the remarks and Accounts Department may, however,
column. In short, schedule of Postal exempt a Government servant officiating
Life Insurance recoveries to be in such a short-term vacancy from
attached to the bills, would be a furnishing security if the circumstances
record not only of those from whom warrant such exemption provided that -
the recovery has actually been
(i) they are satisfied that there is no risk
affected but also of those from whom
involved;
98
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(ii) such exemption is granted only in the basis of mutually agreeable terms and
case of a permanent Government conditions or in exchange for equal value
servant; and land or payment of value of land or cost of
(iii) the period of officiating arrangement acquisition.
does not exceed four months. Rule 310 (3) Transfer of buildings and
Rule 307 Notwithstanding anything contained in superstructures on land shall be treated
Rule 275, security need not be furnished similar to transfer of land. Transfer of
in cases of – buildings and superstructures on land vide
above shall be at the present day cost
(a) Government servants who are
minus depreciation of these structure(s)
entrusted with the custody of stores,
standing on the land. Valuation for this
which in the opinion of the competent
purpose shall be obtained from the
authority are not considerable.
Central Public Works Department at the
(b) Government servants, who are
time of transfer.
entrusted with the custody of office
Rule 310 (4) The allotment of land to, and recovery
furniture, stationery and other articles
of cost of buildings from the Public Sector
required for office management, if the
Undertakings shall be at 'market value' as
Head of Office is satisfied about the
defined in paragraph - 2 of Appendix - 7.
safeguards against loss through
pilferage. Rule 310 (5) The transfer of land and building
between the Union and State
(c) Librarian and Library Staff.
Governments shall be regulated by the
(d) Drivers of Government vehicles.
provisions of Articles 294, 295, 298 and
Rule 308 Retention of Security. A security deposit 299 of the Constitution and subsidiary
taken from Government servant shall be instructions issued by the Union
retained for at least six months from the Government which are reproduced as
date he vacates his post, but a security Appendix - 7.
bond shall be retained permanently or
until it is certain there is no further
VI. CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS AND
necessity for keeping it.
OTHER TRUSTS
V. TRANSFER OF LAND AND BUILDINGS
Rule 311 Detailed instructions relating to Charitable
Endowments and other Trusts are
Rule 309 Save as otherwise provided in any law, rule embodied in Appendix -8.
or order relating to the transfer of
Government land, no land belonging to
VII. LOCAL BODIES
the Government or any of its bodies,
including autonomous bodies, PSUs, etc.
shall be sold without previous sanction of Rule 312 (1) Financial arrangements between
the Government. Central Government and Local Bodies.
Rule 310 (1) Transfer of Land. Transfer of land Unless any one of the following
from a Union Territory to a Central arrangements is authorized by specific
Government Department (i.e. Ministry or orders of Government, a local body will be
Department of the Union Government required to pay,in advance, the estimated
including Defence, Railways, and Posts amount of charges to be incurred or cost of
and Telegraphs) or vice versa shall be on services to be rendered, by Government
'no profit no loss' basis. on account of the fund:-
Rule 310 (2) Transfer of land from one Department (i) payments made by Government are
of the Government (as defined in Rule debited to the balances of the deposits
309) to another shall be on 'no profit no of the local fund with government; or
loss' basis. (ii) payments are made as advances from
‘No profit no loss’ as indicated at rules public funds in the first instance
310(1) and 310(2) above does not pending recovery from the local funds.
necessarily mean transfer being effected Rule 312 (2) Notwithstanding the provision
with ‘zero cost’. Transfer can be on the contained in Rule 281 (1) in case of
99
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
emergency such as epidemics pre- time to time, should be waived in those
payment will not be insisted upon from cases where the audit is done by the
local bodies for supply of medicines from Comptroller and Auditor General through
Medical Stores Depots of the Ministry of his own departmental staff but should be
Health. enforced in cases where the Comptroller
Rule 313 Any amount or loan not paid on due date and Auditor General employs professional
to Government by a local body, may be auditors for the Supplementary Audit.
adjusted from any non-statutory grant Rule 319 Financial transactions between
sanctioned for payment to it. Government and local bodies shall be
Rule 314 Taxes etc. collected by Government on rounded off to the nearest Rupee.
behalf of Local Bodies. Proceeds of
taxes, fines or other revenues levied or VIII. MAINTENANCE OF RECORDS
collected by Government for or on behalf
of local bodies shall not be appropriated
Rule 320 (1) Destruction of Records. Subject to
direct to a local fund without passing them
any general or special rules or orders
through the Consolidated Fund unless
applicable to particular departments as
expressly authorised by law.
prescribed in their departmental manuals,
Rule 315 Payments to Local Bodies. Subject to
no Government record connected with
provision of relevant act and rules,
accounts shall be destroyed except in
payments to local bodies in respect of
accordance with the provisions of
revenue and other moneys raised or
Appendix -9.
received by Government on their behalf
Rule 320 (2) All the records prescribed for retention
will be made in such manner and on such
in Appendix - 9, if maintained in electronic
date, as may be authorized by general or
form should mandatorily have a back up
special orders of Government.
and adhere strictly to the retention period
Rule 316 Audit of Account of Local Bodies.
and the prescribed formats. The
Subject to the provisions of any law made
responsibility for verification and
under Article 149 of the Constitution, the
certification on a monthly/annual basis as
accounts of local bodies, other non-
prescribed under relevant rules should
Government bodies, or institutions will be
also be ensured.
audited by the Indian Audit and Accounts
Department under such terms and
conditions as may be agreed upon IX. CONTINGENT & MISCELLANEOUS
between the Government and the EXPENDITURE
Comptroller and Auditor General of India.
Rule 317 Audit Fees. Audit fees on the basis of Rule 321 Rules relating to contingent expenditure
daily rates prescribed by Government in are available at Rule 13 of the Delegation
consultation with the Comptroller and of the Financial Powers Rules and Rules 96
Auditor General of India from time to time to 98 of the Government of India (Receipts
shall be charged by the Indian Audit and and Payments) Rules, 1983.
Accounts Department for the audit of local Rule 322 Permanent Advance or Imprest.
and other non-Government funds, Permanent advance or Imprest for meeting
excluding funds for the audit of which the day to day contingent and emergent
rates of fees recoverable are prescribed by expenditure may be granted to a
law or by rules having the force of law. government servant by the Head of the
Provided that nothing contained in this Department in consultation with Internal
rule shall be held to override any special Finance Wing, keeping the amount of
instructions of Government exempting any advance to the minimum required for
particular local body or institution wholly smooth functioning. Procedures for
or partially from the payment of audit fees. maintenance of permanent advance or
Rule 318 In the case of Government Companies, Imprest are available in para 10.12 of the
the recovery of the cost of Supplementary Civil Accounts Manual.
Audit conducted under Section 143(6) of Rule 323 (1) Advances for Contingent and
Companies Act, 2013 as amended from Miscellaneous purpose. The Head of the
100
Chapter – 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Office may sanction advances to a
Government Servant for purchase of
goods or services or any other special
purpose needed for the management of
the office, subject to the following
conditions:-
(i) The amount of expenditure being
higher than the Permanent Advance
available, cannot be met out of it.
(ii) The purchase or other purpose cannot
be managed under the normal
procedures, envisaging post-
procurement payment system.
(iii) The amount of advance should not be
more than the power delegated to the
Head of the Office for the purpose.
(iv) The Head of the Office shall be
responsible for timely recovery or
adjustment of the advance.
Rule 323 (2) The adjustment bill, along with
balance if any, shall be submitted by the
government servant within fifteen days of
the drawal of advance, failing which the
advance or balance shall be recovered
from his next salary(ies).
Rule 324 The Ministry or Department may sanction
the grant of an advance to a Government
Pleader in connection with law suits, to
which Government is a party, up to the
maximum limit of Rupees twenty-five
thousand at a time. The amount so
advanced should be adjusted at the time
of settlement of Counsel’s fee bills.
101
APPENDIX– 1
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX– 1
[See Rule 37 ]
INSTRUCTIONS FOR REGULATING THE ENFORCEMENT
OF RESPONSIBILITY FOR LOSSES, ETC.
1. The cardinal principle governing the assessment of responsibility is that, every Government officer should
exercise the same vigilance in respect of expenditure from public fund generally as a person of ordinary
prudence would exercise in respect of the expenditure and the custody of his own money. While, the competent
authority may, in special cases, condone an officer's honest errors of judgement involving financial loss if the
officer can show that he has acted in good faith and done his best up to the limits of his ability and experience,
personal liability shall be strictly enforced against all officers who are dishonest, careless or negligent in the
duties entrusted to them.
2. In cases where loss is due to delinquencies of subordinate officials and where it appears that this has been
facilitated by laxity of supervision on the part of a superior officer, the latter shall also be called strictly to account
and his personal liability in the matter carefully assessed.
3. (a) The question of enforcing pecuniary liability shall always be considered as well as the question of other
forms of disciplinary action. In deciding the degree of an officer's pecuniary liability, it will be necessary to
look not only to the circumstances of the case but also to the financial circumstances of the officer, since it
should be recognized that the penalty should not be such as to impair his future efficiency.
(b) In particular if the loss has occurred through fraud, every endeavour should be made to recover the whole
amount lost from the guilty persons and if laxity of supervision has facilitated the fraud, the supervising
officer at fault may properly be penalized either directly by requiring him to make good in money a
sufficient proportion of the loss or indirectly by reduction or stoppage of his increments of pay.
(c) It should always be considered whether the depreciated value of the Government property or
equipment lost, damaged or destroyed by the carelessness of individuals entrusted with their care should
be recovered from the delinquent official. The depreciated value of the stores may be calculated by
applying the 20% of depreciation in the case of vehicles, including cycles, and 15% in the case of calculating
machines, on the reduced balance every year. The amount to be recovered may be limited to the
Government servant's capacity to pay.
4. When a pensionable Government servant is concerned in any irregularity or loss, the authority investigating the
case shall bear in mind the provisions contained in Central Civil Services (Pension) Rules 1972 as amended
from time to time and immediately inform the Audit Officer and/or the Accounts Officer, as the case may be,
responsible for reporting on his title to Pension or Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity, and the authority competent
to sanction Pension or Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity and it will be the duty of the latter to make a note of the
information and see that the Gratuity or Death-Cum-Retirement Gratuity is not paid before a conclusion is
arrived at as regards the Government servant's culpability and final orders are issued thereon.
5. The fact that Government servants who were guilty of frauds or irregularities have been demobilized or have
retired and have thus escaped punishment, should not be made a justification for absolving those who are also
guilty but who still remain in service.
6. It is of the greatest importance to avoid delay in the investigation of any loss due to fraud, negligence, financial
irregularity, etc. Should the administrative authority require the assistance of the Audit Officer and/or the
Accounts Officer, as the case may be, in pursuing the investigation, he may call on that officer for all vouchers
and other documents that may be relevant to the investigation; and if the investigation is complex and he needs
the assistance of an expert Audit Officer/ Accounts Officer to unravel it, he should apply forthwith for that
assistance to Government which will then negotiate with Audit Officer and/or the Accounts Officer concerned
for the services of an investigating staff. Thereafter, the administrative authority and the Audit /Accounts
authority shall be personally responsible within their respective spheres, for the expeditious conduct of the
enquiry. In any case in which it appears that recourse to judicial proceedings is likely, the Special Police
Establishment or the State Police should be associated with the investigation.
7. Depending upon the results of the inquiry, departmental proceedings and/or prosecution shall be instituted at
the earliest moment against the delinquent officials concerned and conducted with strict adherence to the
Central Civil Services (Classification, Control and Appeal) Rules, 1957, and other instructions prescribed in this
regard by Government.
102
APPENDIX– 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX– 2
[See Rule 52 ]
PROCEDURE FOR PREPARATION OF
DETAILED ESTIMATES OF RECEIPTS
1. Revenue receipts. - These comprise (i) Central taxes, duties and cesses administered by the Central Board of
Direct Taxes and the Central Board of Excise and Customs; (ii) local taxes and duties and other receipts in
relation to the Union Territories without Legislature; (iii) interest receipts of loans and advances by the Central
Government as also interest charged to commercial departments, etc., (iv) notional receipts from adjustments
based on principles of accounting like grant assistance from foreign Governments or International institutions;
and (v) all other revenue receipts including dividends on equity investments of the Central Government, cesses
collected by the Ministries and Departments, etc.
2. Capital Receipts. These comprise (i) Internal debt (market loan, treasury bills, etc.); (ii) External debt; (iii)
Repayment of loans and advances made by the Central Government; (iv) Disinvestment Receipts (v) Other
Liabilities.
3. (1) Estimates of receipts of Central Taxes and Duties and External Aid receipts are prepared within the Ministry of
Finance by the Central Board of Direct Taxes, the Central Board of Excise and Customs and the Controller of Aid
Accounts and Audit. Estimates of internal debt (market loans) receipts are framed by the Budget Division.
3. (2) Estimates of revenue receipts of the Union Territory Administrations will be furnished to the Ministry of
Finance by the concerned Audit Officer / Accounts Officer wherever departmentalization of accounts has not
taken place and by the Controller of Accounts of the Union Territory Administrations where departmentalization
of accounts has been introduced.
3. (3) Estimates of receipts in all other cases will be prepared by Controller of Accounts of each Department after
obtaining necessary data by the 30th November from the various organizations / field units and such scrutiny as
may be necessary in the light of policy decisions and other post Budget developments.
4. Estimates will be furnished to the Ministry of Finance in prescribed forms (GFR 2, 2-A and 2-B) by the prescribed
date, each year for the ensuing Budget.
5. (1) In preparing the Revised Estimates, while previous year's actuals and current year's trends will be material
factors to review the original Budget Estimates, special attention should be devoted to making as realistic an
estimate as possible of receipts which are likely to materialize during the rest of the financial year.
5. (2) In framing the Budget Estimates for the ensuing year, the estimating authorities should exercise utmost care.
While all receipts which can be foreseen in the light of latest trends, decisions and developments must be
provided for, care should be taken to ensure that undue optimism does not influence these estimates. Similarly,
where the receipts have a seasonal character, due note should be taken thereof in preparing the estimates.
5. (3) Receipts by way of recoveries from Central Government Ministries / Departments, are to be excluded in
preparing Receipt Estimates. Other recoveries (from the State and Union Territory Governments, foreign
Governments, companies and statutory bodies, individuals, etc.) will, however, be included in the Receipt
Estimates.
5. (4) Estimates of receipts by way of interest on loans and advances will be based on the terms of the loans
sanctioned, as entered in the Loan Registers, including defaults, if any. The estimates should be realistic; that is
to say, that the estimates should reflect not merely what is due but what is likely to be realized during the year
together with the reasons for non-recovery of the difference between receipts due and assumed in the estimates.
In the case of Public Sector Units, interest receipts expected from their internal resources should be distinguished
from notional recoveries offset by corresponding expenditure provisions in the form of subsidies and loans.
Similarly, where repayments due are refinanced by further loans or by conversion of past loans into equity, the
details should be furnished.
5. (5) In reporting estimates of receipts by way of foreign grant assistance in cash or in kind, care should be taken
to classify foreign grant receipts in cash under the Major Head '1605 External Grant Assistance' and those in the
form of commodities under the Major Head '1606 Aid Materials and Equipment'. In the case of commodities
grants, identical provision will be made in expenditure estimates under the Major head '3606 Aid Materials and
103
APPENDIX– 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Equipment's' (both as debits to represent the notional payment therefor and as credits - recoveries in reductions
of expenditure - to reflect the counter-balancing entries), as well as under the final functional Head of Account
showing the final destination and use of the aid materials and equipment. (Refer to Form GFR 2A)
NOTE. For utilization of cash grants, provision in expenditure estimates under the final functional Heads of
Account will be necessary.
5. (6) In reporting the estimates, the estimating authorities should confine their estimates to those items of receipts
which are to be accounted for finally in their own accounts and ultimately in the accounts of the Ministry/
Department to which they are subordinate. All other receipts/recoveries entering the accounts of another
Ministry/ Department should be communicated to the concerned Ministry/Department for consolidation in their
estimates (e.g., receipts of CGHS contributions and rent recoveries in respect of Government accommodation).
104
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX– 3
[ Rule 52]
INSTRUCTIONS FOR PREPARATION OF DETAILED
ESTIMATES OF EXPENDITURE FROM THE CONSOLIDATED FUND
1. For purpose of Budget Estimates, expenditure from the Consolidated Fund –with the merger of Plan and Non-
Plan from Budget 2017-18 will comprise of expenditure on revenue account and on capital account including
loans and advances, and shown in the separate categories as applicable, comprising of I. Central Expenditure:
(i) Secretariat Expenditure; (ii) Central Sector Schemes and (iii) Other Central Expenditure and II. Transfers: (i)
Centrally Sponsored Schemes (ii) Finance Commission Transfers and (iii) Other Transfers.
A. GENERAL GUIDELINES FOR PREPARING EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES
2. To facilitate appropriate scrutiny and consolidation of Expenditure Estimates for reporting to the Ministry of
Finance, the Financial Adviser in each Ministry / Department will obtain detailed estimates and other
supporting data from each of the estimating authorities under the control of the Ministry / Department, in
appropriate forms, sufficiently in advance.
3. The framing of the Revised Estimates for the current year should always precede estimation for the ensuing year.
The Revised Estimates should be framed with great care to include only those items which are likely to
materialize for payment during the current year, in the light of (i) actuals so far recorded during the current year,
compared with the actuals for corresponding period of the last and previous years, (ii) seasonal character or
otherwise of the nature of expenditure, (iii) sanctions for expenditure and orders of appropriation or
re- appropriation already issued or contemplated and (iv) any other relevant factor, decision or development.
The Budget Estimate for the ensuing year should likewise be prepared on the basis of what is expected to be
paid, under proper sanction, during the ensuring year, including arrears of previous years, if any. Due attention
to considerations of economy must be paid and while all inescapable and foreseeable expenditures should be
provided for, care should be taken that the estimate is not influenced by undue optimism.
4. No lump sum provision will be made in the Budget except where urgent measures are to be provided for
meeting emergent situations or for meeting preliminary expenses on a project/scheme which has been
accepted in principle for being taken up in the financial year. In latter cases Budget provision will be limited to
the requirements of preliminary expenses and for such initial outlay, as, for example, on collection of material,
recruitment of skeleton staff, etc.
Provision for a 'token' demand should not be made in the Budget Estimates for the purpose of seeking approval
in principle for big schemes without the full financial implications being worked out and got approved by the
appropriate authorities. In accordance with instructions contained in Paragraph (viii) of Appendix (5), a 'token'
demand can be made during the course of a year for a project / scheme when the details thereof are ready and
funds are also available for undertaking it but it cannot be started without Parliament's approval, it being in the
nature of a 'New Service/New Instrument of Services'.
5. All estimates should be prepared on gross basis and 'voted' and 'charged' portions must be shown separately;
even expenditure met partly or fully from receipts taken in reduction of such expenditure or those
counterbalanced by receipts credited as revenue to the Consolidated Fund, must be reported in such estimates
on gross basis. Care should also be taken to ensure that all notional receipts reported in 'Receipt Estimates'
(such as interest receipts fully or partly subsidized, loan repayment receipts partly or fully refinanced through
further loans or conversions into equity, receipts of foreign grant assistance in the form of commodities or
material, etc.) are properly matched by adequate provisions in expenditure estimates.
6. The estimates of expenditure should include all items which are fully accounted for in the accounts of the
Ministry/Departments to which the estimating authority is subordinate; they shall also cover expenditure, if any,
in Union Territories without Legislature, whether provided for in the demands of the said Ministry / Department
or in the 'Area' demand of the concerned Union Territory. Estimates of 'Works Expenditure', if any, against the
provisions in the demands of the Ministry of Urban Development, as well as expenditure on pensions (including
commutation payments, gratuity payments, pension contributions, etc.) interest payments, loans and advances
105
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
to Government servants, etc., which are provided for in the centralized Grants/Appropriations controlled by the
Ministry of Finance should be furnished to the Ministry of Urban Development and the Ministry of Finance.
7. The estimate of establishment charges should be framed taking into account the trends over preceding three
years and other relevant factors like changes in rates of pay, allowances, number of posts and their filling and
the economy instructions issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time.
8. Expenditure estimates will be prepared with full accounts classification, i.e., Major/Sub-Major Head, Minor
Head, Sub-Head, Detailed Head and Object Head of Account. The correctness of accounts classification must
be ensured by the Principal Chief Controller / Chief Controller/ Controller of Accounts in each case. Doubts, if
any, may be clarified beforehand in consultation with the Ministry of Finance, Budget Division and Controller
General of Accounts. The relevant Grant number and title of Appropriation should also be mentioned to
facilitate identification of the provision in Budget Estimates for the current year.
9. Unless otherwise indicated by the Ministry of Finance, estimates (both Revised Estimates for the current year and
Budget Estimates for the ensuing year) should reach the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs,
Budget Division, by the date prescribed by the Ministry of Finance, each year, in triplicate in Form GFR 4, a
separate form being used for each Major Head of Account.
10.To facilitate appreciation and scrutiny of the estimates, any major variations between the Budget and Revised
Estimates for the current year and also between the Revised Estimates for the current year and Budget Estimates
for the ensuing year should be explained cogently. In particular, all provisions for subsidy, capital investment or
loan to a Public Sector Undertaking, must be explained by indicating their purpose and the extent to which they
are intended to cover losses, working capital needs, debt or interest liabilities of the undertaking.
11.Wherever the proposed estimates attract the limitations of 'New Service/New Instrument of Service', the fact
must be specifically highlighted. The guidelines to be followed in this regard are indicated in Annexure - I to this
Appendix. For all 'new' schemes, other than purely 'works' projects, the estimates proposed should be supported
by details set out in Annexure - II to this Appendix. In the case of provisions of 'Grants-in-aid' to non-
Government entities, the full purpose thereof and the nature of the grants, whether recurring or non-recurring,
should also be indicated.
12. All provisions for transfer of Government assets to Public Sector Undertaking and other non-Government
entities must also be highlighted, indicating whether the transfer is by way of grants or by way of equity
investment or loan. Similarly, in the case of nationalization or take-over of any private sector assets, the related
provisions in estimates must be supported by full details, such as the effective date of take-over, the agreed
compensation amount and the manner of its payment, etc. In cases of takeover, where the assets are
simultaneously transferred to a Public Sector Undertaking, it must be ensured that the estimates provide for (i)
payment of compensation for the take-over, (ii) for transfer of assets to the Public Sector Undertaking, by means
of recovery of compensation payment to be taken in reduction of expenditure, and (iii) provisions for equity or
loan
to the Public Sector Undertaking.
B. SCHEME RELATED EXPENDITURE ESTIMATES
13.The Budget Division through the yearly Budget Circular will prescribe the form and the manner in which
proposals are required to be submitted to them for determining the scheme allocations,(both Central Sector
Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes) for the ensuing year. The Financial Adviser in each Ministry /
Department of the Central Government will accordingly call for requisite data from the estimating authorities,
public sector and other enterprises under the control of the Ministry / Department, etc. The approved allocations
for Central Sector and Centrally Sponsored Schemes will be communicated by the Ministry of Finance to the
106
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Central Ministries / Department. Ministries/ Departments will finalize the Statement of Budget Estimates,
indicating the total outlay approved for each scheme / organization and the extent to which it is to be met from
extra-budget resources and from provisions in the Demands for Grants.
14. Subject to such directions as may be issued by the Ministry of Finance from time to time, the Revised Estimates for
the current year and Budget Estimates of the ensuing year, in respect of Scheme provisions, are to be sent to
the Ministry of Finance in Form GFR 7. For furnishing these estimates, instructions for preparation and
submission of Other than scheme Expenditure Estimates will apply to the extent relevant; in addition, the
following points should also be borne in mind :-
(i) Such part of the approved budgetary support for Scheme outlay as relates to 'works expenditure' and
has been accepted by the Ministry of Urban Development for inclusion in their Demands for Grants
should be excluded by the other Ministries / Departments in reporting the estimates to the Ministry of
Finance in Form GFR 4.
(ii) In the case of, provisions for equity investments and loans to public sector and other enterprises, as
well as those for grants-in-aid, specific schemes, for which the outlay is provided and the extent for
each of them is also to be indicated clearly.
(iii) Provisions for Scheme expenditure on Central Sector Schemes and Centrally Sponsored Schemes,
including such expenditures in Union Territories, are to be included in the relevant demand of the
Administrative Ministry/ Department and not in 'Area' Demand of the concerned Union Territory.
107
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ANNEXURE –I TO APPENDIX-3
(Refer: Ministry of Finance, Budget Division's OM No. F.1(23)-B(AC)/2005 dated 25.05.2006
[ See Paragraph 11 of Appendix – 3/Rule 63 ]
FINANCIAL LIMITS TO BE OBSERVED DETERMINING CASES
RELATING TO “NEW SERVICE”/NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE
Nature of Transaction Limits upto which expenditure can be Limits beyond which prior
met by re-appropriation of savings in approval of Parliament is
a Grant subject to report to Parliament required for expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund
1 2 3
I. CAPITAL EXPENDITURE
A. Departmental Undertakings
(i) Setting up a new --- All cases
undertaking, or taking up
a new activity by an
existing undertaking.
(ii) Additional Investment in Above Rs.2.50 crore but not Above Rs. 5 crore
an existing undertaking exceeding Rs. 5 crore.
B. Public Sector Companies/Corporations
(i) Setting up of a new --- All cases
Company or splitting up
of an existing Company,
or amalgamation of two
or more Companies,
or taking up a new activity
by an existing Company
(ii) Additional investment in/
loans to an existing
company
a) Where there is no Above Rs.50 lakhs but Above Rs. 1 crore
Budget Provision not exceeding Rs.1crore
b) Where Budget Provision
exists for investment
and/or loans
Paid up capital
of the Company
(i) Upto Rs. 50 crore 20% of appropriation Above 20% of appropriation
already voted or already voted or
Rs.10 crore, Rs.10 crore,
whichever is less whichever is less.
(ii) Above Rs.50 crore 20% of appropriation Above 20% of appropriation
already voted or already voted or
Rs.20 crore, Rs.20 crore,
whichever is less whichever is less.
108
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
C. All bodies or authorities within the administrative control/management of Central
Government or substantially financed by the Central Government.
Loans Upto 10% of the appropriation already More than 10% over the
voted or Rs. 10 crore, whichever is less appropriation already voted by
Parliament or Rs.10 crore.
whichever is less
Note: Where a lumpsum provision is made for providing 'Loans' under a particular scheme, the details of
substantial apportionment (10% of lumpsum or Rs. 1 crore, whichever is higher) should be reported to
Parliament. In the case of lumpsum provision of loans to States, the State-wise distribution should be
reported to Parliament.
Nature of transaction Limits upto which expenditure can be Limits beyond which prior
met by re-appropriation of savings in approval of Parliament is
a Grant subject to report to Parliament required for expenditure from
the Consolidated Fund
D. Expenditure on new Above Rs.50 lakhs but not exceeding Above Rs.2.5 crore or above
Works (Land, Buildings Rs. 2.5 crore or not exceeding 10% of 10% of the appropriation
and/or Machinery) the appropriation already voted, already voted.
whichever is less.
II REVENUE EXPENDITURE
E. Grants-in-aid to any --- All cases
body or authority
Note: Where a lumpsum provision is made for providing grants-in-aid under a particular scheme, the
details of substantial apportionment (10% of lumpsum or Rs. 1 crore, whichever is higher) should be
reported to Parliament. In the case of lumpsum provision of grants to States, the State-wise distribution
should be reported to Parliament.
F. Subsidies
(i) New Cases – All cases
(ii) Enhancement or provision Upto 10% of the appropriation already More than 10 % of the
in the existing approved by the Parliament appropriation already voted by
appropriation or Rs.10 crore, whichever is less. Parliament or Rs.10 crore,
whichever is less.
Payments against cess Limits as applicable to grants-in-aid to All cases
collections statutory or public institutions will apply
New Commissions or – Above Rs.20 lakhs (total
Committees of Enquiry expenditure)
109
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
G. Write off of Above Rs 50,000 but not exceeding Above Rs.1 lakh (individual
Government loans Rs. 1 Lakh (individual cases) cases)
H. Other cases of
Government Each case to be considered on merits.
expenditure
I. Posts The aforesaid limits, including The aforesaid limits, including
Railways those relating to Works expenditure, those relating to Works
Defence will also apply to these Departments expenditure, will also apply to
subject to considerations of security these Departments subject to
in the case of Defence considerations of security in the
case of Defence Services
Estimates.
Note 1: For investment in Ordnance Factories, the limit of Rs.5 crore mentioned in item A (ii) will be applicable
with reference to investment in all the factories as a whole.
Note 2: Civil Works, which do not form part of any project of the departmental undertakings (Ordnance
Factories) should be treated as ordinary Defence works. As such, prior approval of Parliament will be
necessary if the cost of individual works exceeds Rs.2.5 crore and in cases where the individual works
cost Rs.50 lakhs or more but not exceeding Rs.2.5 crore, a report to Parliament will be required. A list of
such works should, however, be supplied to Director of Audit, Defence Services.
110
APPENDIX– 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ANNEXURE - II TO APPENDIX - 3
[ See Paragraph 11 of Appendix - 3/Rule 63 ]
MEMORANDUM FOR PROPOSALS INVOLVING
EXPENDITURE ON NEW SERVICE OR NEW INSTRUMENT OF SERVICE
Government of India
Ministry of.......................................
Department of.................................
New Delhi, the................................
MEMORANDUM
1. Statement of proposal :
(a) Title of the proposal / scheme.
(b) Description of the proposal / scheme and its objects.
(c) Justification for the proposal / scheme and what alternatives have been considered.
(d) Description of the manner in which the proposal / scheme is proposed to be implemented including
mention of agency through which the scheme will be executed.
(e) Schedule of programme and target date of completion.
2. Financial implications of the proposal:
(a) Nature of the scheme (Central Sector Scheme or Centrally Sponsored – or Others.)
(b) Total outlay (recurring and non-recurring separately), its broad details and its year-wise phasing.
(c) (i) Budget allocation, in a scheme; and
(ii) Budget provision in the current financial year;
if no Budget provision exists, how is the expenditure proposed to be met?
(d) Foreign exchange component of the outlay and how it is proposed to be met.
(e) Component of grant, loan and subsidy, if any, in the total outlay involved and their proposed terms. (f)
Number of posts, their pay scales and the basis adopted for staffing (Statement attached).
(g) Broad details of construction works, their justification and basis of estimates (Statement attached). (h)
Requirement of stores and equipment together with justification and cost (Statement attached).
(i) Achievement / return expected and other economic implications, if any.
3. (a) Comments, if any, of the NITI Aayog (for Schemes only).
(b) Comments, if any, of other Ministries / Departments which may have been consulted.
4. Supplementary information, if any.
5. Points on which decision / sanctions are required.
Secretary to the Government of India.
Ministry of........................................
Department of..................................
111
APPENDIX– 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX – 4
[See Note below Rule 52]
PROCEDURE FOR COMPILATION OF
DETAILED DEMANDS FOR GRANTS
1. The Demand for Grants are presented to Parliament at two levels. The Main Demands for Grants are presented
to Parliament by the Ministry of Finance along with the Annual Financial Statement while the Detailed Demands
for Grants are laid on the Table of the Lok Sabha by the concerned Ministries a few days in advance of the
discussion of the respective Ministries Demands in that House.
Both the Main Demands for Grants as also the Detailed Demands for Grants comprise three parts each, viz.-
Part - I shows the Service for which the Demand (or Appropriation) is intended and the estimates of the gross
amount, separately for Voted and Charged Expenditure, under Revenue and Capital (including Loan) sections
required in the ensuing year in respect of that Service.
Part - II shows break up of the estimates separately. In the Main Demands for Grants, the break up is exhibited up
to the level of Major Heads of Account which correspond to functions of the Government.
In the Detailed Demands for Grants the break up in respect of activities/schemes/organization up to the object
head level is given.
The Detailed Demands for Grants also exhibit actuals of the previous year in Part - II.
Both in the Main Demands for Grants as well as in the Detailed Demands for Grants, the details of recoveries
taken in reduction of expenditure provided for in the Demand or Appropriation are also depicted.
2. All Detailed Demands for Grants of a Ministry / Department are consolidated in a single volume and presented to
Lok Sabha by the concerned Ministry / Department. The Detailed Demands show ‘actual expenditure’
as per accounts in the previous year, Budget and Revised Estimates for the current years and Budget Estimates
for the ensuing year.
(i) The process of compilation should start in July / August with the preparation of a manuscript skeleton.
Manuscript skeletons of Detailed Demands for the ensuing year should be prepared by using the printed
Detailed Demands for the current year by making necessary alterations therein. New sub-heads sanctioned
by the Ministry of Finance, if any, and those expected to be required should also be added in the manuscript
at appropriate places. The manuscript should then be sent to the designated press for a proof. Where
necessary, a second proof may be obtained. The printed skeletons should be available with the Ministries/
Departments preferably by the 15th October each year.
(ii) Two copies of the Demand skeleton may then be sent to the Principal Accounts Officer, as the case may be,
for filling the ‘Actuals’ column for the previous year and to return one copy duly filled in.
(iii) In the master copy of the Demand, the Ministry / Department will then post (1) the figures of actuals as
reported by the Principal Accounts Officer / Accountant-General; (2) Revised Estimates for the current year
and the Budget Estimates for the ensuing year from the office copy of the SBEs /Demands for Grants sent to
Ministry of Finance. While posting these entries, care should be taken to ensure that –
(a) “Charged” items are shown in italics and are not mixed up with “Voted” provisions;
(b) posting is done accurately against the proper item / head of account including “recoveries”, if any,
taken as reduction of expenditure;
(c) new items are inserted at the proper place under the relevant minor head;
(d) totals of sub-heads, minor heads, major heads, etc., are correctly worked out and posted; that totals of
Revenue section and Capital section as well as the grand totals are correct and show “Charged” and
“Voted” figures distinctly; and
(e) new sub-head (opened through Supplementary Demands) or otherwise or any change in the
numbering and nomenclature sanctioned by the Budget Division since the proof of the skeleton should
also be incorporated in the Master Copy.
112
APPENDIX– 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTE :–A sub-head should appear in the Demand only when there is provision thereunder, either in the
current year(Budget or Revised) or the ensuing year. Wherever only actuals of the previous year pertaining
to a sub-head are to be exhibited, this should be done by inserting suitable footnote on the relevant page.
(iv) The process of compilation and printing of the Demands should be undertaken in stages.
3. The first proof of individual Demands may be obtained after posting actuals of previous year and other than
Scheme estimates (by 15th December). The second proof may be similarly obtained (by 15th January) after
”Scheme” Revised estimates are posted in the first proof. As soon as “Scheme ”provisions for the ensuing year
are finalized and communicated by the Ministry of Finance, they should be posted in the second proof. Before
obtaining the third proof, the following material may also be added.
(A) Main Demands for Grants :
(i) Notes on the Demands for Grants highlighting the following :-
(a) The objectives of the concerned Ministry / Department, how the programmes undertaken or
contemplated contribute towards attainment of such objectives and the agencies entrusted with the
execution of such programmes;
(b) Details of important provisions included in Demands for Grants with particular emphasis on
Scheme provisions and new items of expenditure;
(c) Cogent reasons for significant variations between the Budget Estimates and Revised Estimates for the
current year and between the Revised Estimates, for the current year and the Budget Estimates for the
ensuing year;
(d) Provisions for subsidy in lieu of interest on loans by the Government or token provisions for
concessional rate of interest along with number of likely cases involved and financial implications, if
determinable; and
(e) Complete details of the estimated cost of a project together with its economics and financial
implications (whenever these estimates are revised and the cost of escalation exceeds 20 per cent of the
sanctioned cost or Rs. 3 crores, whichever is more, full reasons therefor and the effect thereof on the
economics of the projects should also be included in the Notes on Demands).
(ii) A statement giving details of provisions in the Budget which attract limitations of “New Service”/”New
Instrument of Service”.
(B) Detailed Demands for Grants :
The Detailed Demands for Grants will be accompanied by the following schedules/ statements:-
(i) Schedule showing the estimated strength of establishment and provision therefor.
(ii) Statement showing project-wise provision for expenditure on externally aided projects in the
Central Schemes.
(iii) Schedule showing provision for payment of grants in aid to non-Government bodies.
(iv) Statement showing details of individual works and projects costing Rs. 5 crore or above.
(v) Statement showing revised cost estimates of projects of public sector enterprises and departmental
undertakings.
(vi) Statement showing transfer or gift of Government properties of value exceeding Rs. 5 lakhs to non-
Government bodies.
(vii)Statement showing contributions to International bodies. This statement will include only items of
contribution, membership fees to international bodies, which constitute revenue expenditure. Subscriptions
to international bodies, which represent investments and are accounted for in the Capital section, are to be
excluded from it.
113
APPENDIX– 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(viii)Statement showing guarantees given by the Central Government and outstanding as on 31st March of the
preceding year.
(ix) Statement showing grants-in-aid exceeding Rs. 5 lakhs (recurring ) or Rs. 10 lakhs (non-recurring) actually
sanctioned to private institutions/organizations/ individuals.
4. In addition the Detailed Demands for Grants will also include where necessary, “Notes on Important Projects
and Schemes”, e.g., where the Ministry / Department do not bring out performance Budgets.
5. The third proof on receipt from the press should be thoroughly checked for accuracy of all estimates and other
data, as these must necessarily conform with the main Demands for Grants. Therefore for obtaining page
proof, all pages should be serially numbered and table of contents prepared. The page proof received from the
Press should be fully scrutinized.
6. A sample printed copy of the Demands should be scrutinized on receipt from Press and where necessary an
errata may be prepared, got printed and pasted by the Press in individual copies of the Printed Demands.
7. The Demands of smaller Departments like Lok Sabha, Rajya Sabha, Department of Parliamentary Affairs,
Staff, Household and Allowances of the President, Secretariat of the Vice-President and Union Public Service
Commission which are clubbed in a single volume are to be prepared and presented by the Ministry of Finance.
114
APPENDIX– 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX – 5
[Rule 66]
PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED IN CONNECTION
WITH THE DEMANDS FOR SUPPLEMENTARY GRANTS
An excess over the sanctioned Grant or Appropriation may arise owing to either –
(a) an unforeseen emergency; or
(b) under-estimated or insufficient allowance for factors leading to the growth of expenditure.
In the case of an excess of either type the Head of the Department or the Controlling Officer concerned should
proceed as follows :-
(i) He should, in the first place, examine the allotments given to other Disbursing Officers under the same
detailed head within the unit of appropriation, and transfer to the Disbursing Officer who requires an
additional allotment such sum as can be permanently or temporarily spared. Since appropriation audit is
ordinarily conducted against total allotments for a unit, reappropriation in the technical sense of the word is
not involved in such cases. The process amounts only to redistribution which the Controlling Officer can
ordinarily effect without reference to any other authority.
(ii) Should he find such redistribution impossible he should examine the allotments against other detailed heads
inside the primary units of appropriation, with the object of discovering probable savings and effecting a
transfer. Where such redistribution is feasible, he should if he has been vested with the necessary powers,
carry it out. Otherwise, he should obtain the sanction of the competent authority.
(iii) If the provision of funds from within the primary units proves to be impossible, an examination of the whole
grant should be undertaken to see whether there are likely to be savings under any of the other units of grant
or appropriation which can be utilized to meet it. If so, he should proceed as indicated in Clause (ii) above.
(iv) If such savings are not available, it should be seen whether special economies can be effected under other
primary units of appropriation. If funds cannot be provided by either of these methods, it will have to be
considered whether the excess should be met by postponement of expenditure or whether an application for
supplementary grant or appropriation should be made.
(v) The Supplementary Demand for Grants shall be presented to the Parliament in a number of batches as
decided by the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. The first batch shall normally consist of
requirements of the following nature :-
(a) Cases where advances from Contingency Fund of India have been granted, which are required to be
recouped to the Fund.
(b) Payment against a court decree, which cannot be postponed; and
(c) Cases of additional requirement of funds for making immediate payments, which can be met by re-
appropriation of savings in the Grant but attract the limitation of New Service / New Instrument of
Service.
(vi) All applications for supplementary grants or appropriations should be submitted by the Department of the
Central Government administratively concerned to the Ministry of Finance on such dates and in such forms /
batches as may be prescribed by the latter from time to time.
(vii)On receipt of an application for a supplementary grant, the Ministry of Finance will review the position of the
grant of appropriation as a whole with reference to the known actuals of the year to date and the actuals and
estimates for previous years. If after this examination, the Ministry of Finance comes to the conclusion that it
should be possible for the Administrative Department to meet the expenditure from within the sanctioned
grant either from normal savings or by special economies or in the last resort by judicious postponement of
other expenditure or in the last resort by judicious postponement of other expenditure, the Administrative
Department will be so informed and no supplementary demand will be presented to Parliament. If, on the
other hand, the Ministry of Finance considers that a supplementary grant will be necessary, a demand will be
placed before Parliament.
115
APPENDIX– 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
(viii)If during the course of the year it is found necessary to incur expenditure on a ‘New Service’ not provided for
in the annual budget the Administrative Department shall explain to the Ministry of Finance why the
expenditure was not provided for in the original budget and why it cannot be postponed for consideration in
connection with the next budget. The Ministry of Finance, if satisfied on these points, will consider whether it
would not be reasonable to ask the department concerned to curtail its other expenditure so as to keep the
total within the grant. Ordinarily, no “new service” or item will be accepted by the Ministry of Finance, unless
the department concerned can guarantee that the extra expenditure will be met from normal savings or by
special economies within the grant. Cases which involve additional grant will normally be accepted by the
Ministry of Finance only if they relate to matters of real imperative necessity or to the earning or
safeguarding of revenue. The demand for a supplementary grant of appropriation or a token vote in
respect of a “new service” will be presented to Parliament as soon as practicable after the need arises.
NOTE. –The expression ‘New Service’ wherever used in this Appendix includes – ‘New Instrument of Service’.
116
APPENDIX– 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX – 6
[Rule 67. (4)]
THE CONTIGENCY FUND OF INDIA RULES
SRO 1358. - In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 4 of the Contingency Fund of India Act, 1950 (XLIXof
1950), the Central Government hereby makes the following rules:-
CONTINGENCY FUND OF INDIA RULES
1. These rules may be called the Contingency Fund of India Rules.
2. The Contingency Fund of India shall be held on behalf of the President by the Secretary to theGovernment of
India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs.
3. From out of the Balance in the Fund, such amounts as may be agreed upon from time to time shall be placed at
the disposal of the Financial Commissioner of Railways for the purpose of meeting the unforeseen expenditure
of the Railways.
4. Subject to the provisions of Rule 5 below, all applications for advances from the Fund shall be made to the
Secretary to the Government of India, Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs. The applications
shall give -
(i) brief particulars of the additional expenditure involved,
(ii) the circumstances in which provision could not be included in the budget,
(iii) why its postponement is not possible,
(iv) the amount required to be advanced from the Fund with full cost of the proposal for the year or part of the
year, as the case may be, and
(v) the grant or appropriation under which supplementary provision will eventually have to be obtained.
5. Applications for advances required by Railways shall be made to the Financial Commissioner of Railways in the
manner provided for in Rule 4.
6. Advances from the Fund shall be made for the purpose of meeting unforeseen expenditure including
expenditure on a new service not contemplated in the annual financial statement.
7. A copy of the order sanctioning the advance, which shall specify the amount, the grant or appropriation to
which it relates and give brief particulars by sub-heads and units of appropriation of the expenditure for
meeting which it is made, shall be forwarded by the Ministry of Finance or the Financial Commissioner of
Railways, as the case may be, to the Audit and Accounts Officers concerned. In addition, the Ministry of Finance
and the Financial Commissioner of Railways shall forward copies of such orders to the Accountant- General,
Central Revenues and the Director of Railway Audit respectively.
8. (1) Supplementary Estimates for all expenditure so financed shall be presented to Parliament at the first session
meeting immediately after the advance is sanctioned unless such advance has been resumed to the
Contingency Fund in accordance with the provisions of sub-rule (2).
NOTE 1. -While presenting to Parliament Estimates for expenditure financed from the Contingency Fund, a
note to the following effect shall be appended to such Estimates :-
‘A sum of Rs. ………………………… has been advanced from the Contingency Fund in
………………………and an equivalent amount is required to enable repayment to be made to that Fund.’
NOTE 2. -If the expenditure on a new service not contemplated in the Annual Financial Statement can be
met, ‘wholly or partly’ from savings available within the authorized appropriation, the note appended to the
Estimates submitted shall be in the following form :-
‘The expenditure is on a new service. A sum of Rs. …………………..has been advanced from Contingency
Fund in ……………….. and an equivalent amount is required to enable repayment to be made to that
Fund.’ The amount, viz., Rs. …………………………… can be found by re-appropriation.
117
APPENDIX– 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
‘A part of that amount, viz., Rs. ……………………… of savings within the grant and a token vote only is now
required, viz., Rs. ……………………. only.
a vote is required for the balance
(2) As soon as Parliament has authorized additional expenditure by means of a Supplementary Appropriation
Act, the advance or advances made from the Contingency Fund, whether for meeting the expenditure
incurred before the Supplementary Estimates were presented to the Parliament or after they were so
presented, shall be resumed to the Fund to the full extent of the appropriation made in Act.
8. A. If in any case, after the order sanctioning an advance from the Contingency Fund has been issued in
accordance with Rule 7 and before action is taken in accordance with Rule 8, it is found that the advance
sanctioned will remain wholly or partly unutilized, an application shall be made to the sanctioning authority for
cancelling or modifying the sanction, as the case may be.
8. B. All advances sanctioned from the Contingency Fund to meet expenditure in excess of the provision for the
service included in an Appropriation (Vote on Accounts) Act shall be resumed to the Contingency Fund as soon
as the Appropriation Act in respect of the expenditure on the service for the whole year, including the excess met
from the advances from the Contingency Fund has been passed.
8. C. If during an Election year, two Budgets are presented to the Parliament, all advances, sanctioned from the
Contingency Fund of India during the period between the presentation of first and second Budgets or during the
period between the presentation of the second Budget and the passing of the connected Appropriation Act to
meet expenditure on a service not included in an Appropriation (Vote on Account) Act and the advances
outstanding at the end of the preceding financial year being advances the estimates for which are included in
the second Budget, shall be resumed to the Contingency Fund as soon as the Appropriation Act in respect of the
expenditure on the service for the whole year has been passed.
NOTE. -A suitable explanation regarding the advance and the recoupment thereof shall be incorporated in the
“Notes on Demands for Grants”. Wherever required, such a case will be included in the statement of ‘New
Service’ / ‘New Instrument of Service’ appended at the end of the demands.
9. A copy of the order resuming the advance, which shall give a reference to the number and date of the order in
which the original advance was made and to the Supplementary Appropriation Act referred to in Rule 8, shall
be forwarded by the Ministry of Finance and the Financial Officers concerned, in addition, to the Audit and
Accounts Officers concerned. In addition, the Ministry of Finance shall forward copies of such orders to the
Accountant General, Central Revenues, and the Director of Railways Audit if pertaining to the Railways.
10. An account of the transactions of the Fund shall be maintained by the Ministry of Finance in Form ‘A’ annexed to
these rules.
11. Actual expenditure incurred against advances from the Contingency Fund shall be recorded in the account
relating to the Contingency Fund in the same details as it would have been shown if it had been paid out of the
Consolidated Fund.
118
ANNEXURE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
FORM A
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ANNEXURE FORM ‘A’
[See Paragraph 10 of Appendix-6 ]
CONTINGENCY FUND OF INDIA
Amount of the Fund Rs........................................................
SI. Date of Number Number Number Amount Supplementary Amount of Balance Initials Remarks
No. transaction and and and date of Appropriation advance after each of
name of date of the of the advance act providing resumed transaction Officer-
Grant of application order resumed for the in-
appropriation for making Additional charge
advance the Expenditure
advance
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11)
NOTE1.- The balance should be struck after each transaction.
NOTE2.- The amount of the advances should be entered in
black ink when made and in red ink when resumed.
119
APPENDIX– 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX - 7
[See Rule 310 (4) and 310 (5) ]
TRANSFER OF LAND AND BUILDINGS BETWEEN
THE UNION AND STATE GOVERNMENTS
1. These rules apply to the transfer of land and buildings between the Union and the State Governments and
also to the surrender to the State Governments of land belonging to Railways.
The general position under Article 294 of the Constitution is that as from the commencement of the
Constitution -
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty
for the purposes of the Government of the Dominion of India and all property and assets which
immediately before such commencement were vested in His Majesty for the purpose of the Government of
each Governor’s Province, shall vest respectively in the Union and the corresponding State; and all rights,
liabilities and obligations of the Government of the Dominion of India and of the Government of each
Governor’s Province, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be the rights, liabilities and
obligations respectively of the Government of India and the Government of each corresponding State
subject to any adjustment made or to be made by reason of the creation before the commencement of the
construction of the Dominion of Pakistan or of the Province, of West Bengal, West Punjab and East Punjab.
Article 294, as is evident, relates to succession to property, assets, rights, liabilities and obligations in
certain cases only; Article 295 of the Constitution which relate to succession to property, assets, rights,
liabilities and obligations in other cases, provides that -
(i) As from the commencement of the Constitution :
(a) all property and assets which immediately before such commencement were vested in any Indian
State corresponding to a State specified in Part -B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union if
specified in Part - B of the First Schedule shall vest in the Union if the purpose for which such
property and assets were held immediately before such commencement will thereafter be
purposes of the Union relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List; and
(b) all rights, liabilities and obligations of the Government of any Indian State corresponding to a State
specified in Part -B of the First Schedule, whether arising out of any contract or otherwise, shall be
the rights, liabilities and obligations of the Union Government, if the purposes for which such rights
were acquired or liabilities or obligations were incurred before such commencement will thereafter
be purposes of the Union Government relating to any of the matters enumerated in the Union List:
subject to any agreement entered into in that behalf by the Union Government with the
Government of that State.
(ii) Subject as aforesaid, the Government of each State specified in Part ‘B’ of the First Schedule shall, as
from the commencement of the Constitution, be the successor of the Government of the corresponding
Indian State as regards all property and assets and all rights, liabilities and obligations, whether arising
out of any contract or otherwise, other than those referred to in Clause (1).
All property and assets, which include land and buildings, and which vest in the State Government
under Articles 294 and 295 of the Constitution or otherwise shall be at the disposal of the respective
State Governments, who will be at liberty to dispose them of by sale, mortgage, etc., and the proceeds
thereof shall be credited to the revenues of the respective State Governments.
From the commencement of the Constitution, the transfer of land between the Union and the
State Government shall be regulated by mutual agreement except when they are acquired under some
Act. The Union Government have laid down the following principles to be observed in regard to certain
points :-
(i) (a) When land belonging to a private party has to be acquired on behalf of the Union Government
acquisition shall be at the expense of that Government.
(b) In cases where the Union Government require any land, which is in occupation of the State
Government, to be transferred to them, the amount payable by the Union
120
APPENDIX– 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Government will ordinarily be the market value of the land and buildings, if any, thereon.
(c) The amount payable will include the capitalized value of land revenue assessable on the land
when the transfer causes actual loss of land revenue to the State Government.
(d) Solatium of 15 per cent payable under the Land Acquisition Act will not apply to such transfers.
(ii) Land surplus to the requirements of the Union Government :- When the Union Government no
longer required land in their possession, the Government of the State in which it is situated will be
given the option of assuming possession of the whole or any portion thereof subject to the following
conditions :-
(a) the Union government themselves shall be the judges of whether they require to retain any
particular land or not;
(b) if the State Government desire to assume possession of the land, the option to do so shall be
exercised within six months of the date on which the Union Government signify their intention
of surrendering the land;
(c) the amount payable for the land will in all cases be its market value at the date of transfer;
(d) when the State Government desire to assume possession of only a portion of the land
surrendered, they shall be entitled to do so only if the value of the land as a whole is not
materially reduced by the division; and
(e) if the State Government do not desire to assume possession of any land on the foregoing terms,
the Union Government will be free to dispose it of to a third party. Before, however, so
disposing of the land, the Union Government will consult the State Government as to the levy
of ground rent or assessment and the conditions, if any, subject to which it should be sold and
they will, as far as possible, dispose of the land subject to the conditions which the State
Government may desire to impose. The Union Government are not, however, bound to obtain
the concurrence of the State Government in all cases, and in cases of disagreement the Union
Government shall be the sole judge of the terms and conditions to be imposed.
(iii) Determination of Disputes as to Titles. - Disputes as to title between the Union Government and a Stat
Government shall be determined by the Supreme Court.
2. Market value defined. -Market value when applied to land may be defined as the price which the land
would fetch if sold in the open market subject to the ground rent or assessment shown against it in the
revenue registers, or, if no ground rent or assessment shown against it in the revenue registers, subject to a
ground rent or assessment levied at the rate at which ground rent or assessment is actually being levied on
similar lands in the neighbourhood excluding all cases in which such similar lands in the neighbourhood
are held free of ground rent or assessment at favourable or unfavourable rates of ground or assessment.
This is the market value which has to be credited or debited, as the case may be, in the case of all
transactions between the State Governments and the Union Government or between the Union
Government and State Governments or the Railways.
121
APPENDIX– 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX - 8
[ See Rule 286. (3) and Rule311]
CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS AND OTHER TRUSTS
I. CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS
1. The duties of the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India are prescribed in the Charitable Endowments
Act, 1890 (Act VI of 1890), and the rules framed thereunder, which are printed as an Annexure hereto.
2. Under sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Charitable Endowments Act, the Deputy Secretary/Director (Budget) in
the Ministry of Finance, Department of Economic Affairs, nominated for the purpose, has been appointed ex
officio to be the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India with effect from the 1st April, 1954. All the
property of Charitable Endowments, the objects of which extend beyond a single State or which are objects to
which the executive authority of the Central Government extend, vest in him.
The Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India is authorized to employ the agency of the Treasurer of
Charitable Endowments of a State, with the consent of the State Governments, for discharging any of the
functions assigned to him under the rules referred to in Paragraph 1 above.
3. When a copy of a vesting order is received by the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India, he should at
once place himself in communication with the persons who appear from the order to be the holders of the
documents of title relating to the property or of the securities mentioned in the order, and request them to
forward the Title Deeds, or securities in a registered cover and to insure the cover for Rs. 100. These do not
require to be endorsed, as the vesting order operates to transfer the securities to the Treasurer.
4. At every change of Office of the Deputy Secretary/Director (Budget) in the Ministry of Finance, Department of
Economic Affairs nominated for the purpose, a formal transfer of charge of the Treasurer of Charitable
Endowments for India should also take place and as separate charge report, supported by a statement of the
total of the balances of the Funds vested in the Treasurer, duly signed by the relieved and the relieving Treasurers
should be sent to Government.
A list of receipts granted by the Reserve Bank in acknowledgement of the securities forwarded to it for safe
custody as also of the securities kept in the custody of the Treasurer should also be prepared and signed by the
relieved and the relieving Treasurers, and sent to Government along with the charge report.
NOTE. -Whenever there is a change in the Office of a Treasurer of Charitable Endowments of a State who has
been acting as an agent of the treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India, a charge report prepared in the
manner indicated in this paragraph should be furnished to the latter.
II. MISCELLANEOUS TRUST ACCOUNTS
5. If, under any general or special orders of Government, an Audit Officer / Accounts Officer or any other
Government officer is required to act in his official capacity as a Trustee or Depository of any public or quasi-
public fund, which does come within the scope of the accounts of Government, or of any Charitable Endowment
and is not a Government security held in trust under the rules in Chapter IX of the Government Securities
Manual, such an officer should endeavour to have the trust vested, if possible, in the Treasurer of Charitable
Endowments for India; but, if that course is not possible, he should open an account with the State Bank of India,
or with any other approved Bank, for the deposit of moneys received by him on account of Trust. Full and clear
record of all transactions relating to the trust fund should be kept in the books of accounts in his personal
custody in a form complying with the terms and conditions of the Trust. The securities, if any, deposited with him
should be dealt with in accordance with the instructions contained in Chapter IX of the Government Securities
Manual.
6. The books of accounts should be supported by a short statement descriptive of the nature and obligation of the
Trust, with reference to the documents bearing upon it, so that any other Government officer on receiving
charge may know by reference to it exactly what his obligations are in the matter.
122
APPENDIX– 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTE. -The receipt and disposal of interest should be recorded in these accounts which are meant for the
principal of the Trusts only.
7. The accounts should be balanced and closed every 31st day of March. They should also be balanced and
closed when the Government officer acting as the Trustee makes over charge of his office to a successor or
substitute, a balance sheet being appended to the charge report and signed both by the officer receiving and
the officer giving over charge.
8. The accounts will be subject to such audit check as may be prescribed by Government.
123
ANNEXURE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ANNEXURE
[ See Paragraph 1 of Appendix -8 ]
In exercise of the powers conferred by Section 13 of the
Charitable Endowments Act, 1890 (VI of 1890), and in supersession of the late Home Department
Notification No. 1569 - Judicial, dated the 24th October, 1890, the Central Government is
pleased to make the following rules and forms :-
THE CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS (CENTRAL) RULES, 1942
1. Short Title. -
(1) These rules may be called the Charitable Endowments (Central) Rules, 1942.
(2) They apply to charitable endowments the objects of which extend beyond a single State or are objects, to
which the executive authority of the Central Government extends.
2. Interpretation.- In these rules -
(a) “the Act” means the Charitable Endowments Act, 1890;
(b) “Treasurer” means the Treasurer of Charitable Endowments for India for the time being, appointed under
sub-section (1) of Section 3 of the Act, and includes such other officer as the Treasurer may appoint to
discharge any of the functions assigned to him under these rules;
(c) “Form” means a form appended to these rules.
3. Previous publication of vesting orders and schemes.-On cases in which private persons apply for a vesting
order or a scheme or modification of a scheme, and in all cases in which it is proposed to depart in any respect
from the ascertained wishes or presumable intentions of the founder of an endowment, there shall ordinarily,
and unless the Central Government otherwise directs, be precious publication of the proposed vesting order or
scheme or modification.
4. Mode of previous publication.
(1) Unless the Central Government is of opinion that a proposed vesting order or proposed scheme or
modification of a scheme may be made or settled without previous publication, it shall publish a draft of the
proposed order, scheme or modification or a sufficient abstract thereof, for the information of persons
likely to be affected thereby.
(2) The publication shall be made in the Official Gazette and in such other manner as the Central
Government may direct.
(3) A notice specifying a date on or after which the proposed order, scheme or modification will be taken into
consideration by the Central Government should be published with the draft or abstract.
(4) The Central Government shall consider any objection or suggestion which it may receive from any person
with respect to the proposed order, scheme or modification thereof before the date specified in the notice
under sub-rule (3).
5. Costs. The cost of the previous publication under Rule 4 of any proposed order, scheme or modification of a
scheme, and any other costs incurred or which may be incurred in the making of the orders or in the settlement
of a scheme or modification of a scheme, shall be paid by the applicant for the order, scheme or modification,
as the case may be, and, if the Central Government so directs may be paid by him out of any money in his
possession pertaining to the trust to which his application relates.
6. Securities which may vest in the Treasurer.-No securities for money except the securities mentioned in
Clauses (a), (b), (bb), (c) and (d) of Section 20 of the Indian Trusts Act, 1882 (II of 1882), shall be vested in the
Treasurer.
7. Accounts of trusts consisting of immovable property.-In the case of property vested in the Treasurer other
than securities for money, the person acting in the administration of the trust and having, under sub-section (3)
of Section 8 of the Act, the possession, management and control of the property and the application of the
income thereof, shall in books to be kept by him, regularly enter or cause to be entered full and true accounts of
all moneys received and paid respectively on account of the trust, and shall, on the demand of the Central
Government, submit annually to such public servant as the Central Government may appoint in this behalf, in
such form and at such time as the Central Government may prescribe, an abstract of those accounts and such
returns as to other matters relating to the administration of the trust as the Central Government may from time
to time see fit to require.
124
ANNEXURE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
8. Fees.
(1) The following are prescribed as the fees to be paid to the Central Government in respect of any property
vested under the Act in the Treasurer :-
(i) In the case of property other than securities for money, the actual charge incurred by the Treasurer in the
discharge of his functions in respect of he property.
(ii) In the case of securities for money, at the rate of one Paisa for every rupee of interest collected.
The fee shall be charged on interest by rounding off the amount to the nearest rupee, fractions of a
rupee below fifty Paisa or more being reckoned as one rupee.
(2) The Treasurer may deduct any fees payable to the Central Government under this rule on account of any
endowment from any money in his hands on account of such endowment. If he holds no such moneys the
amount shall be claimed form the administrators of the endowment.
9. Vesting orders how filed. - All copies of vesting orders received by the Treasurer shall be filed together and
shall be numbered in consecutive order of their receipt; when a sufficient number have been received they shall
be bound in volumes. A note shall be made on each vesting order of any entries in the registers prescribed
under these rules relating to the property vesting in the Treasurer under the order.
10. Registers of securities. - On the receipt of any securities for money, or on their purchase by himself, the
Treasurer shall record their receipt in a register in Form 1. He shall also keep a separate account for each
endowment in Form 2, in which he shall record all receipts including any amount sent for investment, and all
disbursements. In the cash account in Part - II of Form 2 the Treasurer shall record only his own transactions
(such as the payment of the money to the administrator), and not the transactions of the administrators of the
endowment fund.
11. Stock Disposal Register. - The Treasurer shall enter all securities returned or sold by him in a register in Form 3.
Returns shall also be entered in Form 2, where the amount returned will be deducted from the capital of the
endowment concerned.
12. Custody of Securities. - On the issue of a vesting order under Section 4 of the Act in respect of any securities for
money, the person authorized under Section 6 of the Act to make the application for such vesting order shall, as
soon as practicable, forward to the Treasurer the said securities. The Treasurer shall, after recording the receipt
of the said securities in the registers kept under Rule10, take steps, as soon as practicable, to have them
converted into stock and keep the stock certificate in his custody. After conversion, entries shall be made in the
Treasurer’s Stock Register in Form 7. A consolidated register showing the securities (e.g., Promissory
Notes and the Stock Certificates) in the custody of the Treasurer shall also be maintained in Form 8.
13. Accounting of Interest. - The Treasurer, on receipt of any interest securities, shall pass it through his General
Trust Interest Account under a special Sub-Head “Interests on Charitable Endowments under Act VI of 1890”.
The interest will then be distributed to the various ledger accounts in the register in Form 2, in which the gross
amounts shall be shown, any deductions for fees, etc., being shown as a charge, and the payment of the
balance to the administrators being shown as a disbursement. The Treasurer shall maintain personal, ledger
account in the Reserve Bank and shall make payment to the administrators by cheques. The entries in the ledger
of interest received shall be taken out and agreed annually with the total amount of the interest drawn.
14. Balance Sheet. -The registers in Form 1 shall show all securities vested in the Treasurer as such. In order to
prove the balance actually held by the Treasurer in his own hands, a balance sheet in Form 4 shall be made out
actually and agreed with the actual securities in the Treasurer’s possession. Such agreement shall be certified
on the balance sheet.
15. Publication of accounts. -A list of all properties vested in the Treasurer and an abstract of the accounts of the
interest and the annual agreement of balance shall be published in the Official Gazette on the 15th June of
each year.
16. Register of property other than securities.-The Treasurer shall enter in a register in Form 5 any property
other than securities which becomes vested in him, and shall record in the same register against the original
entry a note of any property of which he is divested.
17. Form of publication of list and abstract.-The list of properties vested in the Treasurer to be published annually
under Rule 15 shall be in Form 6. Part - I will relate to properties other than securities; Part - III will relate to
securities and will also contain the abstract of accounts required by the Act to be published. The Treasurer shall
demand and receive acknowledgements of the correctness of the balances when so published, from the
administrators of endowment funds or from any one or more of their body who may have been authorized by
the administrators to give such acknowledgements and such acknowledgements shall be furnished within 3
months from the date of publication of accounts in the Official Gazette.
18. Audit.-Arrangements for annual audit of the Treasurer’s accounts shall be made by the Comptroller and
Auditor General.
125
FORM 1
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 1
REGISTER OF SECURITIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890
Particulars of Securities received
SI. Date Number From No. and Nature of Distingui- Nominal Total LedgerRemarks
No. of or brief whom date of Securities, e.g. shing value of nominal Folio
Receipt description received forwarding Government number of each value of
of letter securities each security each
Charitable 3 ½ per cent security separate
Endowments Loan of 1865, endowment
Guaranteed
Railway
Debentures, etc.
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
126
FORM 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 2
LEDGER ACCOUNT OF SECURITIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890.
1.Name of Endowment…………
2.Particulars of vesting order…………
3.When vested in Treasurer…………
4.Name of Administrators…………
5.To whom interest is to be sent…………
PART - I - Account of Capital
Value of each security
SI. Particulars Details of Amount Date to Initials
(separate column for each kind)
No. (e.g. securities of which of
Form received (distingui- 3 ½ Guaranteed half interest Treasurer
1 or shing per cent Railway yearly has or
returned) number, Loan of Deben-tures interest been paid Assistant-
etc.) 1865 on receipt in- Charge
1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11.
NOTE.- The balance of the value columns must be worked out on every day on which there is a new entry.
127
FORM 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 2
PART-II-CASH ACCOUNT
RECEIPTS EXPENDITURE
Date Particulars Date Particulars
Amount Amount
NOTE. To be closed annually to balance. The transactions will not be numerous. A few pages of the ledger (rule
only for the Cash Account) may be left for each account, so that the account may be carried on for several
years without opening a fresh Ledger Account.
128
FORM 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 3
STOCK DISPOSAL REGISTER
SI. Date of Name of the No. of entries in Amounts How GO’s Official
No. entry Fund or Trust Stock Register disposed of disposed of initials Designation
of Officer
129
FORM 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 4
BALANCE SHEET OF SECURITIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890
3 ½ per cent Loan (A pair of columns for
Total
Particulars of 1865 each different kind of
security held)
No. Value No. Value
Opening Balance (from last year)
...........Securities received..................
...........Stock Certificates received .....
....................
GRAND TOTAL
Deduct -
Sent to the PDO Reserve Bank of
India for conversion into stock...........
BALANCE
Deduct -
Returned or sold...............................
BALANCE
Add -
Sent for conversion out of which stock
certificates have not been received
..............................
CLOSING BALANCE
Certified that the above closing balance has been compared with the Securities in Treasurer’s possession and has
been found to be agree both as to number and value.
130
FORM 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 5
REGISTER OF PROPERTIES OTHER THAN SECURITIES
HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890
Particulars of vesting order Property held
SI. Name of Administrators of
No. No. Date endowment property Description Value Annual
income
if known
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
Title Deeds held
Initials of Treasurer
Description or Remarks
Date of Where Date of To whom Authority
Assistant-in-Charge
receipt deposited return returned for return
9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16
131
FORM 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 6
LIST AND ABSTRACT ACCOUNT OF
PROPERTIES HELD UNDER ACT VI OF 1890
PART - I - LIST OF PROPERTIES, OTHER THAN SECURITIES
Particulars of vesting order Property held
SI. Name of Administrators
No. No. Date endowment of property Descri- Value Annual Remarks
ption income
if known
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
LIST OF ABSTRACT PART ACCOUNT-II-OF SECURITIES
Case Name Persons Particulars Total Cash Receipts Cash Balance Remarks
No. of in of of expenditure in cash
endow- whose Securities Securities Interest Other Total Payments*
ment behalf or Cash cash
held dividend Receipts* Receipts
realised
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
* Enter details in these columns
132
FORM 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 7
TREASURER’S STOCK REGISTER OF
per cent loan of
No. Serial Date To what To Amount Amount of (Pair of Remarks
of No. of fund whom of half-yearly columns for
Case in entry or trust the interest is investment interest noting interest
Form investment to be payment
No. belongs remitted order
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Rs. P. Rs. P. Rs. P.
133
FORM 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM 8
REGISTER OF CLEAN GOVERNMENT PROMISSORY NOTES AND
STOCK CERTIFICATES HELD BY THE TREASURER
OF CHARITABLE ENDOWMENTS FOR INDIA
Particulars A pair of
Date In Receipts Disposals columns for
SI.
of conversion noting interest Remarks
No.
entry of No. Amounts No. Amounts for half-year
ending
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
134
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX - 9
[ See Rule320]
DESTRUCTION OF OFFICE RECORDS CONNECTED
WITH ACCOUNTS
The destruction of records (including correspondence) connected with accounts shall be governed by the following
Rules and such other subsidiary rules consistent therewith as may be prescribed by Government in this behalf with
the concurrence of the Comptroller and Auditor-General.
1. The following shall on no account be destroyed :-
(i) Records connected with expenditure, which is within the period of limitation fixed by law.
(ii) Records connected with expenditure on projects, schemes or works not completed, although beyond the
period of limitation.
(iii) Records connected with claims to service and personal matters affecting persons in the service except as
indicated in the Annexure to this Appendix.
(iv) Orders and sanctions of a permanent character, until revised.
(v) Records in respect of which an audit objection is outstanding.
2. The following shall be preserved for not less than the period specified against them :-
Description of records
Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. Payments (I) Expenditure Sanctions not 2 years, or one year after
and covered by Paragraph 1 completion of audit,
recoveries. above (including sanctions whichever is later.
Subject to:
relating to grants-in-aid)
(a) Original
(ii) Cash Books maintained 10 years.
nomination being
by the Drawing and
placed in Vol. II of the
Disbursing Officers under
Service Book of
Central Government
Group ‘D’
Account (Receipts and
Government servants;
Payments) Rules, 1983.
and
(iii) Contingent expenditure. 3 years, or one year after (b) Nomination in
completion of audit, original or an
whichever is later. authenticated copy
(iv) Arrear claims (including 3 years, or 1 year after thereof being placed
sanction for investigation, completion of audit, in Vol. II of the Service
where necessary). whichever is later. Book/Personal File in
Papers relating to : case of other
Government servants.
(v) GPF Membership. 1 year.
Subject to an
(vi) GPF Nomination. 1 year - after final
authenticated copy of
settlement of GPF Account.
the sanction being
(vii) Adjustment of missing 1 year. placed on the
credits in GPF Accounts. personal file.
135
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Description of records
Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(viii) Final withdrawal from 1 year.
GPF, e.g., for house building,
higher technical education of
children, etc.
(ix) GPF annual statements. 1 year.
(x)T.A./Transfer T.A. claims 3 years, or one year after
completion of audit,
whichever is later.
2. Budget 3 years. The retention period
Estimates / here related to the
Revised Budget / Revised
Estimates. Estimates as compiled
3. Service by the Budget /
Books of: Accounts Section for
the Department as a
(a) Officials 3 years after issue of final
whole.
entitled to pension/ gratuity
retirement / payment order.
terminal
benefits.
(b) Other 3 years after they have
employees. ceased to be in service.
4. Leave Account of:
(a) Officials 3 years after issue of
entitled to final pension/
retirement / gratuity payment order.
terminal
benefits.
(b) Other 3 years after they have
employees. ceased to be in service.
5. Service records. (a) Nomination relating to 1 year - after settlement Subject to the nomination
family pension in and DCR of benefits. in original or an
gratuity. au thenticated copy thereof
(where original kept with
(b) Civil List Gradation/
the audit)as the may be
Seniority list-
being placed in Vol. II
(i) in the case of 3 years.
of the Service Book/
Departments preparing Pe rsonal File.
bringing out the
compilation. .
(ii) In the case of other 1 year after issue of
Departments (i.e., those relevant compilation.
supplying information
for such compilation)
136
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Description of records
Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(c) Alteration in the 3 years. Su bject to suitable entry
date of birth. being made in
the appropriate service
record and an
authenticated copy of the
order being kept in
Vol. II of Service
Book/Personal file
(d) Admission of previous 3 years; or 1 year after – do –
service not supported by completion of
authenticated service audit, whichever is later
record, e.g., through Subject to a suitable record
collateral evidence. being kept somewhere,
e.g., in the Service Book or
(e) Verification of service. 5 years.
History Sheet.
6. Expenditure (a) In respect of lower To be weeded out at the
statements. formations. end of financial year.
(b) In respect of To be weeded out after the
Department itself. Appropriation Accounts for
the year have been finalized
(c) Register of monthly To be weeded out
expenditure (Form GFR 9) the Appropriation
Accounts for the year have
been finalized.
7. Surety Bonds 3 years after the Bond
executed in ceases to enforceable.
be favour of a
temporary or a
retiring Govern-
ment servant.
8. (a) Pay Bill register. 35 years
(b) Office copies 35 years
of Establishment
pay bills and
related schedules
(in respect of
period for which
pay bill register is
not maintained).
(c) Schedules to 3 years, or one year after
the Establishment the completion of audit,
pay bills for the whichever is later
period for which
pay bill register is
maintained.
(d) Acquaintance 3 years, or one year after
Roll. the completion of audit,
whichever is later.
137
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Description of records
Sl. No. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
9. Muster Rolls.
Such period as may be
prescribed in this behalf in
the departmental regulations
subject to a minimum of
three financial years of
payment excluding the
financial year of payment
10. Bill Register 5 years.
maintained in
Form TR-28-A
11. Paid cheques 5 years T he counter foils of
returned by the paid cheques
Bank to the Audit/ should be preserved
Accounts Office. for the same period as
prescribed for
preservation of paid
cheques, viz., 5 years.
However, in cases
where the counter foils
are required to be
preserved in
connection with
settlement of some
enquiry, etc., these
12. Files, papers and 5 years after the contract/ should not be
documents agreement is fulfilled or destroyed unless
relating to terminated. In cases where otherwise advised by
contracts, audit objections have been the authorities
conducting the
agreements, raised, however, the
enquiry. The other
etc. relevant files and documents
instructions contained
shall not, under any
in this Appendix will
circumstances, be allowed
continue to be
to be destroyed till such time applicable in this case
as the objections have been before the counterfoils
cleared to the satisfaction of which are more than
the audit authorities or have five years old are
been reviewed by the Public actually destroyed.
Accounts Committee.
13. Sub-vouchers 3 years after the expiry of
relating to the the financial year in which
Secret Service the expenditure was
Expenditure. incurred, subject to
completion of administrative
audit and issue of audit
certificate by the nominated
Controlling Officer.
138
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
INSTRUCTIONS
1. The retention period specified in Column (4), in the case of a file, is to be reckoned form the year in which
the file is closed (i.e., action thereon has been completed) and not necessarily from the year in which it is
recorded.
2. In the case of records other than files, e.g., registers, the prescribed retention period will be counted from the
year in which it has ceased to be current.
3. In exceptional cases, a record may be retained for a period longer than that specified in the schedule, if it
has certain special features or such a course is warranted by the peculiar needs of the department. In no
case, however, will a record be retained for a period shorter than that prescribed in the schedule.
4. If a record is required in connection with the disposal of another record, the former will not be weeded out
until after all the issues raised in the latter have been finally decided, even though the retention period
marked on the former may have expired in the meantime. In fact, the retention periods initially marked on
such records should be consciously reviewed and, where necessary, revised suitably.
NOTES.-
(1) Before any pay bills/pay registers are destroyed, the service of the Government servants concerned
should be verified under Rule257in accordance(1) with .
(2) The periods of preservation of account records in Public Works Offices are prescribed separately by
Government.
(3) Where a minimum period after which any record may be destroyed has been prescribed, the Head of a
Department or any other authority empowered by him to do so, may order in writing the destruction of
such record in their own and subordinate offices on the expiry of that period counting from the last day
of the latest financial year covered by the record.
(4) Heads of Departments shall be competent to sanction the destruction of such other records in their own
and subordinate offices as may be considered useless, but a list of such records as property appertain
to the accounts audited by the Indian Audit and Accounts Departments shall be forwarded to the Audit
Officer and or the Accounts Officers, as the case may be, for his concurrence in their destruction before
the destruction is ordered by the Head of Department.
(5) Full details shall be maintained permanently, in each office, of all records destroyed from time to time.
139
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
ANNEXURE TO APPENDIX – 9
Destruction of records referred to in Para. 1 (iii) of this Appendix
Description of records
Sl. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
No.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
1. Creation & (I) Continuance / 1 year Subject to particulars
Classification revival of posts. of sanction being noted
of posts. in Establishment/
Sanction Register.
(ii) Conversion of 10 years – do –
temporary posts.
(iii) Creation of posts. 10 years – do –
(iv) Revision of Permanent in the case – do –
scales of pay. of Departments
issuing orders and
Departments concerned;
other Departments
need keep only the
standing orders,
weeding out superseded
ones as and when
they become obsolete.
(v) Upgrading of posts. 10 years – do –
2. Review for Establishment / Permanent. Where, for any reason
determining Sanction Register. the register is
suitability of re-written, the old
employees for volume will be kept for
continuance in 3 years.
service.
3. Arbitration and 3 years Subject to:
litigation cases. (a) the file not being
closed until the award/
judgment become final
in all respects by
limitation or final
decision in appeal/
revision; and
(b) cases involving
important issues or
containing material of a
high precedent /
reference value being
retained for an
appropriately longer
period either initially or
at the time of review.
140
APPENDIX– 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Description of records
Sl. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
No.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
4. Notices under 1 year If such a notice is
Section 80 of followed up by a civil
Civil Procedure suit, it would become
Code. arbitration/ litigation
case and would,
therefore, need to be
retained for 3 years.
5. Recruitment. Condonation of break 5 years Subject to a suitable
in service. entry being made in the
appropriate service
record and an
authenticated copy of
the order being kept in
Vol. II of Service Book
Personal File.
6. Advance.
house building
(i) Car Advance
Rules
(ii) Conveyance
Advance Rules.
Permanent in the
(iii) Cycle Advance
case of
Rules
Departments issuing
(iv) Festival Advance
the rules, orders
Rules
and instructions;
(v) GPF Advance
other Departments
Rules
need keep only the
(vi) House Building
standing rules, etc.,
Advance Rules
weeding out the
(vii) Motor Cycle /
superseded ones as
Scooter Advance
and when they
Rules
become obsolete.
(viii) Pay Advance Rules
(ix) T. A. Advance
Rules
(x) Travel Concession
Rules
Subject to :
(xi) Other Advance
(i) suitable entries being
Rules
1 year made in pay bill register;
(xii) Grant of car
and (ii) in case of motor
Advance
car/motor cycle / scooter
(xiii) Grant of
and house building
conveyance
advances.
allowance
141
APPENDIX–9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Description of records
Sl. Main-Head Sub-Head Retention Period Remarks
No.
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5)
(xiv) Grant of cycle (a) copies of sanction
advance 1 year being placed on
(xv) Grant of festival personal files; and
advance (b) mortgage deeds and
(xvi) Grant of GPF other agreements
advance advance
executed being kept
(xvii) Grant of
separately in safe
(xviii) Grant of motor
custody for the period
cycle/scooter
they are valid.
advance
(xix) Grant of pay
1 year
advance
(xx) Grant of T. A.
advance
(xxi) Grant of LTC
advance
(xxii) Grant of other
advance
7. Surety Bonds 3 years after the Bond
executed in favor ceases to be
of a temporary enforceable.
or a retiring
Government
servant.
8. Pension / (i) Rules and Orders Permanent in the case of
retirement. (general aspects.) Departments issuing the
rules, orders and
instructions; other
(ii) In respect of Groups Departments need keep only
‘A’, ‘B’ and ‘C’ the standing rules and
Government servants. orders weeding out the
superseded ones as and
when they become obsolete.
(a) Pre-verification of 3 years
pension cases.
(b) Invalid pension Till one year after the
last beneficiary of
(c) Family pension
the family pension
(d) Other pensions
ceases to be entitled to
receive or 5 years
whichever is later.
(e) Gratuity 5 years
(f) Commutation of 15 years
pension after the Bond
ceases to be enforceable.
142
APPENDIX–9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Note – The principle to be adopted in respect of files having financial implications and hence liable to be called by
audit for inspection is that such files should be retained for a period of five years after they have been recorded. If, at
any time during the period of five years, an audit objection having reference to the transaction dealt with in that file
arises, is received, the file will not be destroyed until after the audit objection has been settled to the satisfaction of
the audit. Also, if local audit does not take place within the period of five years, the Head of the Office should
ascertain from the audit authorities whether they have any objection to the files relating to the earlier years, due for
weeding out by the application of the five year formula, being destroyed or retained for a further period for scrutiny
by the audit party and, if so, for what period.
While records may be reviewed and weeded out at periodical intervals in the light of the retention periods prescribed
to avoid their build-up, the attempt should be to make a continuous and conscious effort throughout the year to
weed out unnecessary records. In other words, the working rules should be “weed as you go”.
INSTRUCTIONS:
1. The retention period specified in Column (4) in the case of a file, is to be reckoned from the year in which the file
is closed (i.e., action thereon has been completed) and not necessarily from the year in which it is recorded.
2. In the case of records other than files, e.g., registers, the prescribed retention period will be counted from the
year in which it has ceased to be current.
3. In exceptional cases, a record may be retained for a period longer than that specified in the Schedule, if it has
certain special features or such a course is warranted by the peculiar needs of the Department. In no case,
however, will a record be retained for a period shorter than that prescribed in the schedule.
4. If a record is required in connection with the disposal of another record, the former will not be weeded out until
after all the issues raised on the latter have been finally decided, even though the retention period marked on
the former may have expired in the meantime. In fact, the retention periods initially marked on such records
should be consciously “reviewed and where necessary revised suitably”.
143
APPENDIX–10
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX - 10
[See Rule 61 and Rule 69]
“CHECK AGAINST PROVISION OF FUNDS”
The pre-check to be applied to all payments by the departmentalized Accounts Officers includes a check against
provision of funds also. It is an important part of the functions of the Accounts Office to see that no payment is made
in excess of the budget allotment. In order to exercise an effective check in this behalf, a separate register (DDO-
wise Bill Passing-cum-Expenditure Control Register –Form CAM –9) should be maintained in the Accounts Officer
for each Drawing Officer and by sub-heads and units of appropriation so as to ensure at the time of passing each
bill that the amount of the bill under check is covered by Budget allotment. If the amount of any bill leads to excess
over the Budget allotment or is not covered by an advance from the Contingency Fund, the Accounts Officer should
decline payment under advice to the authority controlling the grant so that the latter could arrange for additional
funds. An Appropriation Audit Register (Form CAM – 62) shall be maintained.
NOTE. – In cases where payment of a bill/claim would lead to excess over the provision under any unit of
appropriation the payment may be made by the Pay and Accounts Office only on receipt of an assurance in writing
from the Ministry/Head of Department controlling the grant that the expenditure involved is not on a New Service,
or New Instrument of Service; that necessary funds to accommodate the expenditure will be provided for in time by
issue of re- appropriation order, etc., that a note to the effect has been kept for further action, and that the grant as a
whole (i.e., separately under Revenue and Capital Sections) is not likely to be exceeded. This applies in respect of
any new item of expenditure, provision for which does not exist in the Budget (as distinct from expenditure on “New
Service” or “New Instrument Service” not provided in the Budget) as well as in cases where the existing provisions is
not sufficient to cover the payments. In case of an urgent requirement of expenditure attracting the
provisions of New Service/New Instruments of Service and thereby supplementary demands through the
approval of Parliament, the same should be referred to Ministry of Finance. The excess expenditure in
such cases can be allowed by the concerned Financial Advisers only on the specific approval of Secretary
(Expenditure) that the necessary funds will be made available through the next batch of supplementary
demands for grant.
If such a contingency in regard to inevitable payment of a bill should arise towards the close of financial year and the
grant as a whole is likely to get exceeded thereby, order of the FA on behalf of the Chief Accounting Authority would
have to be sought.
In case the additional funds required are to be made available merely by reallocation (and not by re- appropriation)
of savings, if any, under the same sub-head of appropriation, the related claim will be passed for payment only after
additional funds therefor are allocated in writing by the Controlling Officer.
144
APPENDIX–11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX - 11
[ See Rule 225 (viii) (b) ]
FORMULA FOR PRICE VARIATION CLAUSE
The formula for Price Variation should ordinarily include a fixed element, a material element and a labour element.
The figures representing the material element and the labour element should reflect the corresponding proportion
of input costs, while the fixed element may range from 10 to 25%. That portion of the price represented by the fixed
element will not be subject to variation. The portions of the price represented by the material element and labour
element alone will attract Price variation. The formula for Price variation will thus be :
P1 = P0 F + a M1 + b L1 - P0
M0 L0
Where P1 is the adjustment amount payable to the supplier (a minus figure will indicate a reduction in the Contract
Price)
P0 is the Contract Price at the base level.
F is the Fixed element not subject to Price variation.
a is the assigned percentage to the material element in the Contract price.
b is the assigned percentage to the labour element in the Contract Price.
L0 and L1 are the wage indices at the base month and year and at the month and year of calculation respectively. M0
and M1 are the material indices at the base month and year and at the month and year of calculation respectively.
If more than one major item of material is involved, the material element can be broken up into two or three
components such as Mx, My &Mz. Where price variation clause has to be provided for services (with insignificant
inputs of materials) as for example in getting Technical assistance normally paid in the form of per diem rates, the
price variation formula should have only two elements viz. a high fixed element and a labour element. The fixed
element can in such cases be 50% or more, depending on the mark-up by the supplier of the Periderm rate vis-à-vis
the wage rates.
145
APPENDIX– 12
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
APPENDIX - 12
[See Rule 279 (1).]
RATES OF GUARANTEE FEE
S. No. Type of Borrowing Rate of Fee
(Per Annum)
1. Borrowing under the market borrowing programme approved by the RBI 0.25 %
2. Borrowing under inter corporate transfers envisaged in the Annual Plan 0.25 %
3. Other Domestic Borrowings :
(i) Pubic Sector including the cooperative sector. 1.00 %
(ii) Other sectors 2.50 %
4. External borrowings 1.20 %
146
FORM GFR 1
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 1
[ Rule 65 (4) ) ]
APPLICATION FOR AN ADDITIONAL APPROPRIATION,
YEAR …………………………. FOR DEPARTMENT
Budget Head Original Expenditure Additional Expenditure
Major and Appropriation appropriation during the past three
Amount Necessary
Minor Heads as years applied for
up for
of Account modified
to the remaining 20 20 20 20
and Primary by competent
month month
unit of authority
Appropriation
Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs. Rs.
No…………………………………., dated …………………………….. 20.
Explanation of insufficiency of grant, recommendations and proposals for re-appropriation by -
(1) Disbursing Officer :
(2) Controlling Officer :
(3) Head of Department :
(4) Secretary to Government in Administrative Department. No…………………………………, dated
……………………………… 20.
Order of sanction with details
Additional appropriation of Rs. ……………………..................................of source of appropriation Sanctioned.
The amount will be met by re-appropriation form ……………………………………………………….............……
Signature ……………………………………………….
Designation …………………………………………….
147
FORM GFR 2
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 2
[ See Paragraph 4 of Appendix - 2 ]
REVENUE RECEIPTS
Ministry / Department / Union Territory :
Major Head :
(In thousands of Rupees)
First Month Last Month
ACCOUNTS Total
Third Eight Seven Five Four
Last year
Second
Last year
Last year
Current Budget
Year Revised
Ensuing Budget
Year
Accounts 7 months Accounts Current year Ensuing
Minor Heads Year
Last Current Third Second Last Budget Revised Budget
year year Last Year Last Year Year Estimate Estimate Estimate
Explanation for increase / decrease (Minor Headwise)
Signature …………………......................................
Designation ………………...............................……
Date ………………………...............................……
148
FORM GFR 2A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 2-A
[ See Paragraph 4 of Appendix - 2 ]
ESTIMATES OF FOREIGN GRANTS CONCERNING
THE MINISTRY / DEPARTMENT …….........................................
(In thousands of Rupees )
Amounts to be provided in
Name Date Particulars Total Receipt Manner
of the of aid of assistance Major Current Current Ensuring of
grant or agreement assistance expected Head Year BE Year RE Year BE utilization
country/ to be of aid*
body received
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Signature …………………………….
Designation ………………………….
Date ………………………………….
* A brief note may be added indicating the project on which aid is to be utilized. In the case of material and
equipment, the relevant grant and expenditure Heads of Account under which (i) utilization of material by Central
Government Departments / Projects, (ii) transfer of material to States, Union Territories and other Bodies will be
adjusted and also whether the utilization on transfer will be on Central Sector Scheme or Centrally Sponsored
Schemes should also be indicated. In cases where the aid material is proposed to be sold the Receipt Major Head
under which the proceeds will be credited should be indicated.
NOTE : Cash grants and assistance in the form of material and equipment should be indicated separately in
Columns 3 to 8.
149
FORM GFR 2B
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 2 - B
[ See Paragraph 4 of Appendix - 2 ]
ESTIMATES OF INTEREST RECEIPTS AND LOAN REPAYMENTS
Ministry / Department ………….................……………………. (In thousands of Rupees)
Interest Receipts Loan Repayments
BE RE BE BE RE BE
Current Current Ensuing Current Current Current
Year Year Year Year Year Year
1. State Governments*.
2. Union Territory Governments*.
3. Interest on Capital Outlay in
departmental commercial
undertakings.
4. Foreign Governments*.
5. Industrial/Commercial/Financial
undertakings
(undertaking-wise details to be given)
:
(a) Public Sector Undertakings. (b)
Private Sector Undertakings.
6. Statutory Bodies (Port Trusts,
Municipalities, KVIC, Tea/Coffee
Boards, etc.)
7. Railways / P&T Reserve Funds.
8. Other parties (Co-operatives,
Educational Institutions, displaced
persons and other individual loanees
except Governments servants)*
9. Government servants.
Total
* Estimates for each State / Union Territory / Foreign Government /Statutory Body or Institution should be separately appended to
the Annexure.
No...................................................................................
Ministry / Department ………......………………..........…..…
Date the ………....……………………………….........……....
Forwarded in duplicate to the Ministry of Finance, Budget Division.
Signature ………………...…………............…...........….…..
Designation………………………………....……...........….…
150
FORM GFR 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 3
[ See Rule 58 and Rule 64(1)) ]
Office of …………………………
Grant No ………………………
LIABILITY REGISTER FOR THE YEAR ……………
SI. Designation Month Serial Nature No. & Agency Estimated Permissible Total
No. of of number in of date of on Cost excess Liability
Disbursing Report Liability Liability indent or which over the (Cols.
Officer Statement connected indent is estimated 8+9)
letter placed cost, in any
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
151
FORM GFR 3
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Balance commitments
Probable month and year Record of Payment
[Col. 10 minus Col. 14(b)]
in which the expenditure
Initials
will be accounted for in
of the Initials
the departmental (a) (b) (a) (b)*
Branch of the
expenditure statement Officer Month Amount Amount Year(s) in Branch Remarks
and which it is Officer
Month Amount of
year likely to be
and expenditure
discharged
year to be incurred
11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19
NOTE :- Cols. 2, 3 and 4 will be operated upon only in the Register of Liabilities maintained by the Controlling
Officers in respect of the case reported by their Disbursing Officers.
* If the balance of commitment is to be discharged during more than one financial year, the year-wise break-up of
the amount should be indicated.
152
FORM GFR 3A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 3-A
[See Rule58]
Office of …………………………
Grant No ………………………
LIABILITY STATEMENT FOR THE MONTH OF …………………………..
Part - I - Statement of Liabilities incurred during the month of report
Probable month in
SI. Nature No. and Agency Estimated Permissible Total
which the expenditure
No. of date on which cost excess liability
will be accounted for Remarks
liability of indent indent is over the (Col. 5 +
in the departmental
or placed or estimated Col. 6)
expenditure statement
connected demand cost, if any
letter is made Month Expenditure
likely to be
incurred
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
153
FORM GFR 3A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Part - II - Payments made against Liabilities and Liabilities
cancelled or finally paid off
Record of payment Balance commitment
Month in Serial Remarks
which No. (a) (b) (a) (b)*
Liability Month Amount Amount Year(s) in which
was and year the balance of
reported
Commitments
is likely to be
discharged.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
NOTE 1- In Col. 2, the number to be entered will be the serial number of the liability in the Liability Statement in
which is was first reported.
NOTE 2 - In the Remarks column, the following information should also be given :-
(i) If payment against a liability is likely to be made, not in the month originally indicated, but in some
other month, the latter should be indicated. If change in the month of payment is the only
information to be given in respect of a liability, the Columns to be used will be 1, 2 and 5.
(ii) Similarly, if the whole or part of a liability has been cancelled or otherwise extinguished, the fact
may be mentioned and brief reasons given.
* If the balance of commitments is to be discharged during more than one financial year, the year -wise break- up of
the amount should be indicated.
154
FORM GFR 3A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Part - III - Progressive amount of outstanding
Balance commitments
Month in Serial
which No. (a) (b)*
liability was Amount Year(s) in which the balance of
reported commitments is likely to be discharged
1 2 3 4
Total
NOTE. 1 - This is a list of liabilities which are pending, that is, those which have not been paid off or otherwise
extinguished or cancelled.
NOTE. 2 - In Column 2, the number to be entered will be the serial number of the liability in the Liability Statement
in which it was first reported.
* If the balance of commitments is to be discharged during more than one financial year, the year -wise break- up of
the amount should be indicated.
155
FORM GFR 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 4
[ See Paragraph 9 of Appendix - 3 ]
STATEMENT OF PROPOSALS FOR PRE-BUDGET DISCUSSION
Demand No.
STATEMENT OF BUDGET ESTIMATES (in crores of Rupees)
Sl. Description as Actuals Actuals B.E. Actuals upto R.E. B.E
No. shown in the For the last two current September current current
Exp.Bud.Vol.2 Preceding years year of current year year
(SBE) year
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
APPENDIX I Expenditure SBE
(See Paragraph3.5)
Ministry/ Department Demand No.
(Rs.in crore)
Actuals BE RE BE
For the last two (current year) (current year) (next year)
Preceding years
Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital
A CENTRE'S EXPENDITURE
I. Establishment Expenditure
II. Central Sector Schemes
III. Other Central Expenditure
B. TRANSFERS TO STATES
IV. Centrally Sponsored Schemes
V. Finance Commission Transfers
VI. Other Transfers to States
156
FORM GFR 4
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 4
[ See Paragraph 3.5 ]
OBJECT HEAD WISE SUMMARY EXPENDITURE
PART C-OBJECT HEADWISE SUMMARY
Demand No.
(Rs.in crore)
Object Object Actual BE Actual RE BE
Head Head 2015-16 Expenditure
Code Name till
September
Revenue Capital Revenue Capital Revenue Capital
157
FORM GFR 5
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 5
[ See Rule 57 (4) (ii) and Rule 57 (5) (iii)]
REGISTER SHOWING EXPENSES BY HEADS OF ACCOUNT
Office of ................................................. Head of Account..........................................
Major Head.................................................
Minor Head................................................
Sub-Head ...................................................
Month
Year (Unit of Appropriation)
Allotment Sub-Head of Grants Deduction, Net
if any amount
SI. No. Voucher No./Token No. & of
Date/Serial No. in Bill Register* the bill
1.
2.
3.
4.
Add adjustment communicated by PAO
Total for the month
Total from 1st April Balance of
the appropriation
NOTE 1. If an allotment is changed, necessary correction in the register should be made in red ink.
NOTE 2. Allotment of expenditure under ‘Charged’ portion should be indicated distinctly.
NOTE 3.- This account should be despatched on the 3rdof the following month.
* Serial No. in Bill Register to be entered only in respect of bills passed by Cheque Drawing DDOs
under their cheque-drawing powers.
Signature.....................................................
Designation.................................................
Date............................................................
158
FORM GFR 6
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 6
[ See Rule 57 (4) (iv) ]
BROADSHEET FOR WATCHING RECEIPT OF
ACCOUNT FROM DISBURSING OFFICERS
Office of .................................................................
Major Head.............................................................
Minor Head ............................................................
Sub-Head ...............................................................
Serial Names of Date of receipt of account
District
No. Disbursing Officers March April May
NOTE 1. Districts are to be arranged according to alphabetical order.
NOTE 2. Dates of receipts should be noted in monthly columns. Reminder should be sent if not received by
the 7thof the month.
159
FORM GFR 7
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 7
[ See Rule 57 (4) (vi) ]
COMPILATION SHEET
Major Head....................................................
Minor Head....................................................
Sub-Head.......................................................
Month Serial No. of the Disbursing Officers Total for Remarks
each officer
Total expenditure ..............................
Add Adjustment communicated by
Accounts Officer and not reckoned by
DDOs ..............................................
......................................................
Grand Total.......................................
Add Total up to previous month...........
…………………................................
Progressive Total up-to-date ...............
........................................................
160
FORM GFR 8
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 8
[ See Rule 57 (4) (viii), (5) (iv) & (6)]
CONSOLIDATED ACCOUNTS
Name of Office........................................................ Grant No.................................................................
Appropriation..........................................................
Financial Year...........................................................
Units of Grants Grants Proportionate Grant Actual
appropriation sanctioned distributed from April to date Expenditure
(Part -III of Demands April
for Grants)
1 2 3 4 5
(i) Salaries Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted
(ii) Total of all units
of appropriation
Actual Expenditure
Units of
appropriation May Progressive June Progressive
(Part -III of Demands expenditure expenditure
for Grants) upto end of May
6 7 8 9
(i) Salaries Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted Charged Voted
(ii) Total of all units
of appropriation
NOTE 1. Subsequent charges, if any, under Column 2 are to be made in red ink.
NOTE 2. Figures under Column 4 may be entered in pencil for facility of updating from month to month.
NOTE 3. Wherever variations between actual expenditure and proportion grant are large, suitable explanations
should be given in a “Remarks” column.
161
FORM GFR 9
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 9
[ See Rule 57 (8) ]
BROADSHEET FOR WATCHING RECEIPT OF THE RETURNS FROM THE HEADS OF
DEPARTMENTS UNDER A DEPARTMENT OF THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
SI. Grant Date of receipt of returns
No. No.
April May June July August Sep. Oct. Nov. Dec. Jan. Feb. March
NOTE 1. Dates of receipt should be noted in monthly columns. Reminders should be sent if returns are not received
by the prescribed date.
NOTE 2. Returns relating to the Secretariat proper should also be maintained in the above form.
162
FORM GFR 10
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 10
[ See Rule 217 (iii) ]
REPORT OF SURPLUS, OBSOLETE AND
UNSERVICEABLE STORES FOR DISPOSAL
Item Particulars Quantity/ Book Value/ Condition Mode of disposal Remarks
No. of stores Weight Original and year (sale, public
purchase of auction or
price purchase otherwise)
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Signature...........................................................
Designation.......................................................
Date..................................................................
163
FORM GFR 11
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 11
[ See Rule 222]
SALE ACCOUNT
Item Particulars Quantity/ Name Highest Highest Earnest Date on Whether the Auctioneer’s
No. of Weight and bid bid money which the articles were Commission
Stores full accepted rejected realized complete actually and
address on amount is handed over acknowled-
of the spot realized on the spot. gement
purchaser and If not, the for
credited actual date its
into of handing payment
treasury over of the
articles with
quantities
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10
Signature...........................................................
Designation.......................................................
Date..................................................................
164
FORM GFR 12A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 12 – A
[(See Rule 238 (1)]
FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE
FOR AUTONOMOUS BODIES OF THE GRANTEE ORGANIZATION
UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE FOR THE YEAR……………………………… in respect
of recurring/non-recurring
GRANTS-IN-AID/SALARIES/CREATION OF CAPITAL ASSETS
1. Name of the Scheme......................................................................................
2. Whether recurring or non-recurring grants.......................................................
3. Grants position at the beginning of the Financial year
(i) Cash in Hand/Bank
(ii) Unadjusted advances
(iii) Total
4. Details of grants received, expenditure incurred and closing balances: (Actuals)
Unspent Interest Interest Grant received during Total Expenditure Closing
Balances of Earned deposited the year Available incurred Balances
Grants thereon back to funds (5-6)
received the (1+2-
years Govern- 3+4)
[figure as at ment
Sl. No.
3 (iii)]
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
Sanction Date Amount
No.
(i) (ii) (iii)
Component wise utilization of grants:
Grant-in-aid– Grant-in-aid– Grant-in-aid–creation Total
General Salary of capital assets
Details of grants position at the end of the year
(i) Cash in Hand/Bank
(ii) Unadjusted Advances
(iii) Total
165
FORM GFR 12A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which grants were sanctioned have been duly fulfilled/are
being fulfilled and that I have exercised following checks to see that the money has been actually utilized for the
purpose for which it was sanctioned:
(i) The main accounts and other subsidiary accounts and registers (including assets registers) are maintained
as prescribed in the relevant Act/Rules/Standing instructions (mention the Act/Rules) and have been duly
audited by designated auditors. The figures depicted above tally with the audited figures mentioned in financial
statements/accounts.
(ii) There exist internal controls for safeguarding public funds/assets, watching outcomes and achievements of
physical targets against the financial inputs, ensuring quality in asset creation etc. & the periodic evaluation of
internal controls is exercised to ensure their effectiveness.
(iii) To the best of our knowledge and belief, no transactions have been entered that are in violation of relevant
Act/Rules/standing instructions and scheme guidelines.
(iv) The responsibilities among the key functionaries for execution of the scheme have been assigned in clear terms
and are not general in nature.
(v) The benefits were extended to the intended beneficiaries and only such areas/districts were covered where the
scheme was intended to operate.
(vi) The expenditure on various components of the scheme was in the proportions authorized as per the scheme
guidelines and terms and conditions of the grants-in-aid.
(vii) It has been ensured that the physical and financial performance under…………….. (name of the scheme has
been according to the requirements, as prescribed in the guidelines issued by Govt. of India and the
performance/targets achieved statement for the year to which the utilization of the fund resulted in outcomes
given at Annexure – I duly enclosed.
(viii)The utilization of the fund resulted in outcomes given at Annexure – II duly enclosed (to be formulated by the
Ministry/Department concerned as per their requirements/specifications.)
(ix) Details of various schemes executed by the agency through grants-in-aid received from the same Ministry or
from other Ministries is enclosed at Annexure –II (to be formulated by the Ministry/Department concerned as per
their requirements/specifications).
Date:
Place:
Signature Signature
Name.......................................................... Name.......................................................
Chief Finance Officer Head of the Organisation
(Head of the Finance)
(Strike out inapplicable terms)
166
FORM GFR 12B
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 12 – B
[ See Rule 256 (2) ]
FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE
(1) Certified that out of the Loan of Rs. …….........…....……. SANCTIONED under ………........……….......……,
dated…………………….….., in favour of ………….....……….. during the year ………......…………. an amount of
Rs. ………....................…….. has been utilized for the purpose for which it was sanctioned, and that the balance of
Rs. ………............... remaining unutilized at the end of the year ……............………… has been surrendered to the
Government (vide No. ……….………., dated………….........… ) / will be adjusted towards the loan payable during
the next financial year.
(2) Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which the loan was sanctioned have been duly
fulfilled/are being fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to see that the money was actually spent for
the purpose for which the loan was made.
Kinds of checks exercised
1.
2.
3.
4.
Signature……….…………………….
Designation ………………………….
Date …………………………………..
167
FORM GFR 12C
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 12 – C
[(See Rule 239)]
FORM OF UTILIZATION CERTIFICATE (FOR STATE GOVERNMENTS)
(Where expenditure incurred by Govt. bodies only)
Sl. Letter Amount Certified that out of Rs......................................................Of
No. No. and date grants sanctioned during the year....................in favour of
.....................................under the Ministry/Department
Letter No. given in the margin and Rs..........................on
account of unspent balance of the previous year, a sum of
Rs.................................has been utilized for the propose of
....................................for which it was sanctioned and that
the balance of Rs..............................remaining unutilized
at the end of the year has been surrendered to
Government (vide No.
Total ...........................dated.......................)/will be adjusted
towards the grants payable during the next
year........................................
2. Certified that I have satisfied myself that the conditions on which the grants-in-aid was sanctioned have been
duly fulfilled/ are being fulfilled and that I have exercised the following checks to see that the money was
actually utilized for the propose for which it was sanctioned.
Kinds of checks exercised
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Signature………………………………………
Designation…………………………………..
Date……………………………………………
PS: The UC shall disclose separately the actual expenditure incurred and loans and advances given to suppliers of
stores and assets, to construction agencies and like in accordance with scheme guidelines and in furtherance to
the scheme objectives, which do not constitute expenditure at the stage. These shall be treated as utilized grants
but allowed to be carried forward.
168
FORM GFR 13
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 13
[ See Rule 262]
STATEMENT OF AGGREGATE BALANCE OF LOAN(S) OUTSTANDING AS
ON 31ST MARCH, 20… AND DETAILS OF DEFAULTS
PAO / Pr. AO Ministry of ………………………………………Major Head………………………
Sub-Major
Details of defaults Amount of default
Head
Earliest
SI. Minor Name Aggregate Original letter Amount Principal Interest date to
No. Head of of the outstanding No(s). and of loan(s) which the
Account borrower balance of Date(s) sanctioned default
loan(s) sanctioning pertains
the loan(s) Rs. Rs. Rs.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
NOTE. - Statements may be prepared on separate sheets for each Major Head, with Minor Head-wise break-up.
Parties having aggregate outstanding balances of less than Rs. 5 lakhs each and which are not defaulters may be
grouped together with a common descriptive head such as “Regional Engineering Colleges”, etc., if possible or
“parties with small outstanding balance” under Column 3.
169
FORM GFR 14
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 14
[ See Rule306. (3) ]
FORM OF SECURITY BOND (FIDELITY BOND DEPOSITED AS SECURITY)
KNOW ALL MEN BY these presents that I, A.B……………………… of ……………………… and held and firmly
bound unto the President of India, his successors and assigns (hereinafter referred to as “Government”) in the sum
of Rs………………(Rupees…………………) to be paid to the Government for which payment, well and truly to be
made, I bind myself, my heirs, executors, administrators, and legal representatives by these presents. Singed and
dated this ……………………… day of ……………………20
2. WHEREAS the above bounden A.B.........................................was on the day of...........................................
20…………………… appointed to and now holds the office of ……………in the office of ……………AND
WHEREAS the said A.B………… by virtue of holding such office is bound to collect ……………………… (here
describe the nature of Cashier’s/ Storekeeper’s/Sub-storekeeper’s/Sub-ordinate’s duties) …………………
and to keep and render true and faithful accounts of his dealings with all property and money which may come
into his hands or possession under his control such accounts to be kept in the form and manner that may, from
time to time, be prescribed by duly constituted authority, and also to prepare and submit such returns, accounts
and other documents as may from time to time be required of him.
3. AND WHEREAS the said A.B…………………has, in pursuance of Rule 270 of the General Financial Rules,
1963, delivered to and deposited with ……………… a Fidelity Bond issued by ……………Company for the
sum of Rs………………… (Rupees ………………) as Security for the due and faithful performance by the said
A.B………………… of the duties of his said office and of any other office requiring security to which he may be
appointed at any time and of other duties which may be required of him while holding any office as aforesaid
and for the purpose of securing and indemnifying the Government against all loss, injury, damage, costs, or
expenses which the Government may, in any way, suffer, sustain or pay by reason of misconduct, neglect,
oversight or any other act of omission of the said A.B……………………… or of any person or persons acting
under him or for whom he may be responsible.
4. AND WHEREAS the said A.B……………………… has entered into the above Bond in the sum of
……………………… conditioned for the due performance by him the said A.B…………………… of the duties of
the said office and of other duties appertaining thereto or which may lawfully be required of him and to
indemnify the Government against loss from or by reason of the acts or defaults of the said A.B…………………
and of all and every person and persons aforesaid.
5. NOW THE CONDITION of the above written Bond is such that of the said A.B…………………… has whilst he
has held the said office of …………………… as aforesaid always duly performed and fulfilled the duties of his
said office and if he shall, whilst he shall hold the said office or any other office requiring security to which he
may be appointed, or in which he may act, always duly perform and fulfil all and every duties thereof
respectively and other duties which may from time to time be required of him while holding any such office as
aforesaid, and shall duly pay into the Government Treasury at ………………………… all such money and
securities for money as are payable or deliverable to Government and shall come into his possession or
control by reason of the said office and shall duly account for and deliver up all moneys, papers and other
property which shall come into his possession or control by reason of the said office and if the said
A.B……………… his heirs, executors, administrators or legal representatives shall pay or cause to be paid unto
the Government the amount of any loss and /or defalcation in the accounts of the said ……………………
within 24 hours after the amount of such loss and /or defalcation shall have been demanded from
the said A.B…………… by the ………………… such demand to be in writing and left at the office or last known
place of residence of the said A.B………………… and shall also at all times indemnify and save, and keep
harmless the Government from all and every loss, injury, damage, actions, suits, proceedings, costs, charges
and expenses which has been or shall or may at any time or times hereafter during the service or employment of
the said A.B……………………… in such office as aforesaid, or any such offices aforesaid, be sustained,
incurred, suffered brought, sued or commenced or paid by the Government by reason of any act,
170
FORM GFR 14
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
embezzlement, defalcation, mismanagement, neglect, failure, misconduct, default, disobedience, omission, or
insolvency of the said A.B……………………… or of any person or persons acting under him or for whom he
may be responsible, then the above written Bond shall be void and of no effect, otherwise the same shall be and
remain in full force.
6. PROVIDED ALWAYS and it is hereby declared and agreed by and between the parties hereto that the said Fidelity
Bond No……………… delivered and deposited as aforesaid shall be and remain at the disposal of the said
officer for the time being or the Government as and for part and additional security over and above the above
written Bond to the Government, for the indemnity and other purposes aforesaid with full power to the
Government or an officer duly authorized in that behalf to obtain and receive payment of the sum or sums of
money recoverable or to be received, upon or by virtue of the said Fidelity Bond or a sufficient portion thereof
and all benefits and advantages thereof and to apply the same in and towards the indemnity as aforesaid of the
Government.
7. AND it is hereby further agreed and declared by and between the parties hereto that the said
A.B……………………… shall keep the said Fidelity Bond issued by the said company in full force by payment of
the premia and as when they fall due and by otherwise conforming to the rules of the said company relating
thereto.
8. PROVIDED ALWAYS that cancellation or lapse at any time of the said Fidelity Bond shall not be deemed to affect
or prejudice the right of the Government to take proceedings upon or under this said Bond against the said
……………………… in case any breach of the condition of this Bond shall be discovered after the cancellation
or lapse of the said Fidelity Bond but the responsibility of the A.B. ………………………… shall at all times
continue and but the Government shall be fully indemnified against all such loss or damage as aforesaid at any
time.
9 PROVIDED FURTHER that nothing herein contained nor in the Fidelity Bond so deposited shall be deemed to
limit the liability of the said A.B…………… in respect of matters aforesaid to the forfeiture of the said sum of
Rupees………………… or part or parts thereof and that if the said sum be found insufficient to
indemnify the Government in full for any loss or damage sustained by them in respect of matters aforesaid or
any of them the said A.B………………… shall pay to Government on demand such further sum as shall be
deemed by…………………… to be necessary in addition to the said Fidelity Bond of Rs…………………………
to cover such loss or damage as aforesaid and that the Government shall be entitled to recover such further sum
payable as aforesaid in any manner open to them.
10. The stamp duty, if any, on this Bond shall be borne by the Government.
Signature
1. Signed and delivered by the above named A.B…………….. in the presence of …………………..
2. Signed for and on behalf of the President of India by ……………… the ……………… being the person directed
or authorized by him in that behalf in the presence of ……………………
171
FORM GFR 15
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 15
[ See Rule 253 (2) (ii) ]
FORM OF WRITTEN UNDERTAKING TO BE EXECUTED BY AN UNDERTAKING /
CORPORATION WHOLLY OWNED BY THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT
AT THE TIME OF SANCTIONING OF A LOAN
Memorandum of written undertaking given on the ……………… day of …………………… two thousand and
……………………… by a company incorporated under the Indian Companies Act, 1913 /the Companies Act,
1956,/ the Companies Act, 2013,having its registered office …………………… a body corporate incorporated
under the same name and style and by under ……………… (Act No…………… of ……………) having its office at
……………………a society registered under the Societies Registration Act (21 of 1860) having its office
at……………… (hereinafter called ‘the Company / Corporation’ which expression shall include its successors and
assigns) to the President of India (hereinafter called ‘the President’ which expression shall include his successors and
assigns).
WHEREAS the said Company / Corporation, etc., applied to the President for a loan of Rs……………………
(Rupees………………………) only. AND WHEREAS the President has agreed to lend an amount of Rs………
(Rupees………………………… only) to the said Company / Corporation, etc., on the terms and conditions
prescribed in the Government of India, Ministry of ……………………… (Department of ………………………)
Letter / Office Memorandum No……………………, dated…………………… (annexed).
Now IT IS HEREBY AGREED by the said Company / Corporation, etc., that, in consideration of the sum of
Rs……………… (Rupees………………… only) lent by the President to the Company / Corporation etc., the
Company / Corporation, etc., hereby agree in accordance with the said terms and conditions –
(i) To repay the loan in …………………… annual equal instalments the first instalment repayable from the
…………………… anniversary of the date of drawal;
(ii) To pay interest at the rate or …………% per annum on the principal payable on each anniversary; and
(iii) In case of default in the payment of the instalment of the loan in accordance with (i) above and / or interest in
accordance with (ii) above, pay interest at penal rate of ……………………% per annum on such overdue
payments.
IT IS HEREBY FURTHER AGREED AND DECLARED that the said Company / Corporation, etc., shall not, without the
written consent of the President, encumber or alienate, create, any mortgage lien or charge by way of
hypothecation, pledge otherwise, or create other encumbrances of any kind whatsoever any part of its land or
buildings or other structure, and / or plant, machinery or any other fixed assets owned by them.
AND IT IS HEREBY AGREED that the said principal amount lent by the President as aforesaid shall be used by the
Company / Corporation, etc., only for the purpose or purposes for which the aforesaid amount was sanctioned and
for no other purpose whatsoever.
IN WITNESS WHEREOF these presents have been executed by the said Company / Corporation the day and year
first above written.
THE PRESIDENT of India has agreed to bear the stamp duty, if any, chargeable on this document. Signed for and on
behalf of…………………..Company / Corporation, etc., by
Shri. ..……..........................… (Name and Designation) in the presence of
1. ……………………………… Seal of the Company / Corporation
2. ………………………………
172
FORM GFR 16
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 16
[ see Rule 286 (1) ]
CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER OF CHARGE
Certified that I /we have in the forenoon / afternoon of this day respectively made over and received charge of the
Office………………………… in pursuance of Order No…………………......…… dated …………………....……...
Received Officer ………………………… Relieving Officer …………………………
Signature ………………………………… Signature …………………………………
(Name in Block Letters) (Name in Block Letters)
Designation……………………………… Designation…………………………………
Station …………………………………… Station ………………………………………
Date ……………………………………… Date …………………………………………
(For use in Audit Office / PAO only)
Noted in A/R at page …………………………
SO/AAO/AO/PAO
Noted in A/R at page……………………………
SO/AAO/AO/PAO
Forwarded …………………………………………………………………………………
NOTE :- Separate certificate (as per Form appended) also to be used where transfer / assumption of charge
involves responsibilities for Cash, Stores etc.
173
FORM GFR16
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 16 (APPENDIX)
[ See Rule 286(1) ]
CERTIFICATE OF TRANSFER OF CHARGE IN RESPECT OF TRANSFER /
ASSUMPTION OF RESPONSIBILITIES FOR CASH, STORES, ETC.
Certified that I/we have in the forenoon / afternoon of this day …………… [date to be indicated] respectively made
over and assumed charge and responsibility of the following :-
Cash Rs…………………………………
Permanent advance Rs…………………
Others……………………………………
Relieved Officer…………………………..
Reliving Officer……………………………
174
FORM GFR16A
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 16A
“Ministry / Department of ………………………….
JOINING REPORT
I hereby report myself for duty this day……………….............…… forenoon / afternoon after availing of leave from
…………........…… to …………….....……… sanctioned vide Ministry / Department of ……………………… Order
No……………, dated ………….……………
Signature ……………………………
(Name in Block Letters)
Designation………………………….
175
FORM GFR 17
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 17
[ See Rule306. (3) ]
GENERAL INSURANCE CORPORATION OF INDIA AND ITS SUBSIDIARIES
FIDELITY GUARANTEE POLICY
POLICY No.
IN CONSIDERATION OF the first premium shown in the First Schedule and subject to the terms and conditions
contained herein or endorsed herein which are to be deemed conditions precedent to any liability on the part of the
Life Insurance Corporation of India (hereinafter called “Corporation”) so far as they relate to anything to be done or
complied with by the Employer, the Corporation agrees and binds itself to make good and reimburse to the
Employer all such direct pecuniary loss not exceeding the amount of guarantee, as the Employer shall sustain by any
act or acts of dishonesty, default or negligence committed by the employed / any of the employed (a) during the
currency of this insurance and (b) during the uninterrupted continuance of employment of such employed and (c) in
connection with his occupation and duties AND DISCOVERED during the currency of this insurance or within a
reasonable time thereafter or within twelve months after determination of such employment whichever event shall
first happen.
The proposal for this insurance made by or on behalf of the Employer together with any correspondence relative
thereto shall be incorporated herein and be the basis of this contract and of every renewal.
THE FIRST SCHEDULE
N a m e
The Employer Business THE PRESIDENT OF INDIA
Address
The Employed : through
The amount of Guarantee Rs.
Occupation and duties:
The first premium Rs.
The renewal date The ………day of ……… in each year.
The currency of this insurance: The period or periods from the date written against the respective names of the
Employed to the then next renewal date and any year thereafter in respect to which the Corporation shall agree to
accept and Employer or Employed shall pay the annual premium specified in the Second Schedule hereto.
THE SECOND SCHEDULE
Period of Name Occupation Amount of Annual Actual
Risk and duties Guarantee Premium Premium
Rs. Rs. P. Rs. P.
In witness whereof this Bond has been signed at …………......…… this day of ……………………20.........
For1 …………………………........…
Prepared by …………………………
Examined by…………………………
N.B.-For your own protection it is incumbent upon you to read your policy and its conditions to ascertain that it
is made out in accordance with your intentions.
1 The name of the Company to be inserted in ink at the time of execution of this form.
176
FORM GFR 17
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
CONDITIONS
In this policy the expression shall bear the respective meanings attached to them in the First Schedule hereto
1. The Corporation shall not be liable to make any payment hereunder if the nature of the business of the Employer
of the duties or conditions of service shall be changed or the remuneration or any of the Employed reduced
without the sanction of the Corporation or if the precautions and checks for securing accuracy of accounts shall
not be duly observed.
2. Notice in writing shall be given to the Corporation’s office as soon as possible after any act or acts of dishonesty,
default or negligence on the part of any of the employed or of reasonable cause of suspicion thereof or any
improper conduct shall have come to the knowledge of the Employer or of any representatives of the employer
to whom is entrusted the duty of superintendence over any of the Employed and no amount shall be payable
under this policy in respect of that Employed by reason of any act committed after such knowledge shall have
come to the Employer or his said representatives. Within three months after such notice the Employer shall
deliver to the Corporation full details of his claim and shall furnish proof of the correctness of such claim. All
books of accounts of the Employer or any Accountant’s report thereon shall be open to the inspection of the
Corporation and the Employer shall give all information and assistance to enable the Corporation to sue for
and obtain reimbursement by any one of the Employed or by his estate of any moneys which the Corporation
shall have paid or become liable to pay under this Policy. Provided always that the Corporation shall not be
entitled to the disclosure of any record or information in respect of which the Employer is entitled to claim
privilege in a Court of Law under Sections 123 and 124 of the Indian Evidence Act.
3. Any moneys of any one of the Employed in respect of whom a claim is made in the hands of the Employer and
any money which but for any act of fraud or dishonesty committed by such one of Employed would have been
due to that Employed from the Employer shall be deducted from the amount otherwise payable under the Policy.
Provided that the Employee is entitled under the law to make such deduction. Provided further that in cases in
which the loss to the Employer is in excess of the maximum amount payable under the policy, the moneys
aforesaid will be applied in the first place to make good the amount of such excess and the balance, if any, shall
be deducted as herein provided. The Employer and the Corporation shall share any other recovery
(excluding insurance and reinsurance and any counter security taken by Corporation) made by either on
account of any loss in the proportions that the amount of the loss borne by each bears to the total amount of the
loss.
4. Notwithstanding anything herein contained to the contrary it is also agreed that the Corporation
guarantees to the Employer that the Employed shall honestly and faithfully account to the Employer for all
moneys or valuables or property which they shall receive or be entrusted with on account of the Employer either
in their personal or individual capacity or as member of group working conjointly with other members and that
the Corporation will make good and reimburse to the Employer such loss not exceeding the amount of
guarantee as the Employer may sustain by any act or acts of default or dishonesty or negligence of the
Employed in the capacity and employment aforesaid and that when individual liability cannot be brought home
to the Employed the amount to be made good shall be that which falls to the share of the Employed calculating
from the total number of men forming such group, i.e., the total loss divided by the total number of men
employed on the particular work.
5. The Corporation also agrees that during the period in which the guarantee shall be in force the particulars
contained in the Second Schedule shall be with the consent of Employer and on previous notice to and on
payment to the Corporation of any additional proportionate premium that may become payable in
consequence of any change in the employed by reason of promotion or otherwise be varied as circumstances
may require and such additional persona as may be taken into the employment of the employer referred to in
the Schedule hereof during such period shall with such consent aforesaid and on previous notice to and on
payment to the Corporation of a further proportionate premium at the rate for the time being applicable be
177
FORM GFR 17
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
added to and included in the said Schedule and the expression Employed used throughout this policy shall as
from the respective date on which the names shall be included in the said schedule be deemed to include all
persons whether previously named in the said Schedule or subsequently added thereto as aforesaid.
6. If any question or difference shall arise between the parties hereto or their respective representatives
touching these presents or the construction hereof or as to the rights, duties or obligations of any persons
hereunder or as to any other matter in anywise arising out of or connected with the subject-matter of these
presents, the same shall be referred to a single Arbitrator to be named by the Government of India. The
Arbitrator so named shall be an officer of Government and shall have all the powers conferred on Arbitrators
under the Indian Arbitration Act. The costs of the reference and award shall be in the discretion of the Arbitrator.
The making of an award in such reference shall be a condition precedent to any liability of the Corporation or
any right of action against the Corporation in respect of such difference. If the Corporation shall disclaim
liability for any claim hereunder and such claim shall not within twelve calendar months from the date of such
disclaimer have been referred to arbitration under the provision herein contained then the claim shall for all
purpose be deemed to have been abandoned and shall not thereafter be recoverable hereunder.
7. The expression "Government of India" for the purpose of Clause 6 above shall mean the Secretary to the
Government of India in the Administrative Ministry/ Head of Department under which the employed
is working.
178
FORM GFR 18
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 18
[ See Rule 211. (ii) ( ) ]
ACCESSION REGISTER
Date Access- Author Title Vol. Place Year Pages Source Class Book Cost Bill With Re-
ion and of No. No. No. drawn marks
Num- Publi- Publi- and date
ber sher cation date
(1) (2) (3) (4) (5) (6) (7) (8) (9) (10) (11) (12) (13) (14) (15)
179
FORM GFR 19
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 19
[ See Rule250. (1) (viii) ]
NOTICE TO BORROWER ABOUT THE DUE DATE
FOR REPAYMENT OF LOAN AND INTEREST THEREON
No………………………
Office of the Controller of Accounts, Ministry / Department of ………….......…… New Delhi, dated the …….......….
To ……………………………
…………………………...…
Subject :-Repayment of loan and payment of interest thereon.
Dear Sir,
According to the terms of the loan of Rs………………… sanctioned to you, vide the Ministry / Department
………………………… Letter No……………………, dated………………………… the annual repayment
instalment and / or interest thereon, detailed below, will become due on…………………………
(i) Repayment ……………………… Rs…………………………… (in words and figures)
(ii) Interest …………………………… Rs…………………………… (in words and figures)
2. Please arrange the payment by the due date. It should be noted that the amount of interest has been calculated
on the assumption that payment will be arranged promptly; otherwise it will be revised upwards in accordance
with the terms of the loan.
3. The amounts due should be tendered, on or before the due date at the …………………… (New Delhi Head
Office / Main Office of the Public Sector Bank (PSB) accredited to the Ministry / Department in cash or by cheque
or draft drawn on any Scheduled Bank / New Delhi, in favour of the aforesaid PSB Branch. The payment should
be accompanied by a memorandum or challan, in duplicate, giving the following details :-
(I) Name of the Ministry / Department………………………………
(ii) Name of the Borrower …………………………………………
(iii) No. and date of loan sanction letter with the loan amount sanctioned ………………………….
(iv) Amount due for payment, separately for interest and payment…………………………
(v) Due date of payment……………………………
(vi) The head of the account indicated below, to which the amounts will be adjusted in Government accounts,
should be included in the challan:
(i) Instalment of Principal. Head of Account
(ii) Interest.
4. Separate cheque / draft and challans should be submitted for payment of principal and interest.
5. For outstation loanees, payment of dues together with memorandum / challans is to be arranged through their
Bank to the aforesaid PSB Branch in New Delhi by the due date.
Yours faithfully
Accounts Officer
180
FORM GFR 20
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 20
[See Rule 305 (1) ]
REGISTER OF POLICY HOLDER
SI No
Policy .No
Name of Policy holder
Designation
Monthly Premium rate
April
May
June
July
August
September
October
November
December
January
February
March
Remarks
181
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
17
18
Amount
actually
recovered
FORM GFR 21
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 21
[ See Rule 234}
REGISTER OF GRANTS TO BE MAINTAINED BY THE SANCTIONING AUTHORITY
(i) Serial Number.
(ii) Number and date of sanction letter.
(iii) Purpose of grant.
(iv) Conditions, if any, attached to the grant.
(v) Amount sanctioned.
(vi) Amount of the Bill.
(vii) Whether conditions attached to the grant have been accepted by the grantee without reservation. (viii)
Dated initials of the sanctioning authority.
(ix) Date by which statements of accounts along with utilization certificate, etc., are required to be
furnished by the grantee.
(x) Date by which utilization certificate is required to be furnished by sanctioning authority to the Accounts
Officer, as the case may be.
(xi) Date by which the statements of accounts, etc., are actually received. (In case there has been delay in the
receipt of these statements, the reasons therefor as well as efforts made by the sanctioning authority to
expedite submission of such statements may be clearly indicated).
(xii) Date of submission of utilization certificate to PAO (in case there has been delay in submission of
utilization certificate, the reasons therefor may be clearly indicated).
(xiii) Unspent balance, if any, also indicating whether the unspent balance has been surrendered by the
grantee Institution / Organisation.
182
FORM GFR 22
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR - 22
[ See Rule211 (ii) (a) ]
REGISTER OF FIXED ASSETS
Name and description of the Fixed Assets ..................................................................
Date Particulars Particulars of supplier Cost of Location of the Remarks
of Asset the Asset Asset
Name and Bill No.
address and date
1 2 3 4 5 6 7
NOTE : The items of similar nature but having significant distinctive features (e.g. study table, office table, computer
table, etc.) should be accounted for separately in stock.
183
FORM GFR 23
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 23
[ See Rule211 (ii) (b) ]
STOCK REGISTER OF CONSUMABLES SUCH AS STATIONERY,
CHEMICALS, SPARE PARTS ETC.
Name of Article................................................. Unit of Accounts .................................................
Date Particulars Suppliers Receipt Issue Issue Balance Unit
Invoice No. Voucher Price
and Date No.
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
NOTE : User’s indent in original shall be treated as issue voucher. Issue voucher number shall be in consecutive
order, financial year wise and it should be noted on each indent.
184
FORM GFR 24
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 24
[ See Rule211 (ii) (d) ]
REGISTER OF ASSETS OF HISTORICAL / ARTISTIC VALUE
Name of Asset.......................................
Date of Source of Cost price, Particulars which Particulars of Location Remarks
acquisition acquisition if any make it an asset of the custodian of the
historic /artistic value of the asset asset
NOTE 1 : The custodian shall take appropriate measures for preservation of the assets.
NOTE 2 : The present value of the asset should be ascertained by obtaining appropriate valuation from an
expert agency and the same is indicated in Column 3, every five years.
185
FORM GFR 25
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 25
[ See Rule 281. (2) & (3) ]
GOVERNMENT GUARANTEES
Name of Ministry /
Department
[ Rs. In crore ]
SI. Beneficiary Loan Authority Period of Purpose Class Sector Details Details Amount
No. [Name of Holder / for validity of Loan of of of Loan
the PSU etc Entity Guarantee [ MOF ID No., Reschedule Securities
in whose giving [MoF & date through pledged
favour Loan approval which the
guarantee No. & Date] guarantee was
is given] last extended]
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 11
Extent of Additions Deletions Invoked Outstanding Rate of Guarantee Fee/ Other
Guarantee Principal, Guarantee Commission conditions
interest etc at Fee/ &
Dis- Not the end of Commi- Receiv- Recei- compli-
charged dis- the period ssion able ved ance
charged
23
NOTES - 1 : For the purpose of Column - 8 the sectors are as under :-
(i) Power (ii) Cooperative (iii) Irrigation (iv) Roads & Transport (v) Urban Development & Housing (vi) Other Infrastructure
(vii) Any other. 2 : For the purpose of Column - 7 the classification is indicated in Rule 281 (4).
186
lapicnirP tseretnI
latoT
12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22
FORM GFR 26
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
FORM GFR 26
[ See Rule277(v). ]
FURNISHING OF DATA REGARDING GUARANTEES TO
MINISTRY OF FINANCE
Name of the Ministry/Department :
Name of Public Sector Undertaking / entity :
Year Turnover Profit Sundry Current If audited by In case of
After tax Debtors Ratio CAG, profit after targets set
tax, taking into by BIFR the
account the same for
comments of Turnover and
CAG Profit.
X-2
X-1
X*
Where ‘X’ is the immediate preceding financial year.
2. In case of proposal seeking extension of guarantee it may specifically be indicated whether the guarantee fee for
the preceding financial year has been paid or not. The amount paid and date of payment should be indicated. In
case of default in payment it may be indicated whether default fee in terms of Rule 279 (3) has been
levied
187
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
CONCORDANCE TABLE
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
Chapter - 1 (Introduction)
1 (1) 1
1 (2) 1
2 2
3 3
4 4
5 5
6 (1) 6 (1)
6 (2) 6 (2)
Chapter – 2 (General System of Financial Management)
7 7
8 (1) 8 (1)
8 (2) 8 (2)
9 9
10 10
11 (1) 11 (1)
11 (2) 11 (2)
12 12
13 13
14 14
15 (1) 15 (1)
15 (2) 15 (2)
15 (3) 15 (3)
16 (1) 16 (1)
16 (2) 16 (2)
17 17
18 18
19 (1) 19 (1)
19 (2) 19 (2)
20 20
21 21
22 22
23 23
24 24
25 (1) 25 (1)
25 (2) 25 (2)
25 (3) 25 (3)
26 26
27 (1) 27 (1)
27 (2) 27 (2)
28 28
29 29
188
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
30 30
31 31
32 32
33 (1) 33 (1)
33 (2) 33 (2)
33 (3) 33 (3)
33 (4) 33 (4)
33 (5) 33 (5)
33 (6) 33 (6)
33 (7) 33 (7)
34 34
35 35
36 36
37 37
38 38
39 39
40 40
41 41
Chapter - 3 (Budget Formulation and Implementation)
42 42
43 (1) 43 (1)
43 (2) 43 (2)
43 (3) 43 (3)
43 (4) 43 (4)
44 44
45 45
46
47
48
49
46 (1) 50(1)
46 (2) 50 (2)
46 (3) 50 (3)
46 (4) 50 (4)
46 (5) 50 (5)
47 (1) 51 (1)
47 (2) 51 (2)
47 (3) 51 (3)
48 (1) 52(1)
48 (2) 52 (2)
52(3)
49 (1) 53 (1)
189
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
49 (2) 53 (2)
54
50 (1) 55(1)
50 (2) 55 (2)
51 56
52 (1) 57 (1)
52 (2) 57(2)
52 (3) 57 (3)
52 (4) 57 (4)
52 (5) 57 (5)
52 (6) 57 (6)
52 (7) 57 (7)
52 (8) 57 (8)
53 58
54 59
55 60
61
56 (1) 62 (1)
56 (2) 62 (2)
56 (3) 62 (3)
62(4)
57 63
58 (1) 64 (1)
58 (2) 64 (2)
59 (1) 65(1)
59 (2) 65 (2)
59 (3) 65 (3)
59 (4) 65 (4)
60 66
61 (1) 67 (1)
61 (2) 67 (2)
61 (3) 67 (3)
61 (4) 67 (4)
62 68
63 69
64 70
Chapter – 4 (Government Accounts)
65 71
66 72
67 73
68 74
69 75
190
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
70 76
71 77
72 78
73 79
74 80
75 81
76 82
77 83
78 Deleted
79 84
80 85
86
87
81 88
82 89
83 90
91
84 92
85 93
86 94
87 95
88 96
89 (1) 97(1)
89 (2) 97(2)
90 98
91 99
92 100
93 101
94 102
95
96 103
97 104
98 (1) 105(1)
98 (2) 105(2)
98 (3) Deleted
99 106
100 107
101 108
102 109
103 110
104 111
105 112
191
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
106 113
107 114
108 115
109 116
110 117
111 118
112 119
113 120
114 121
115 122
116 123
117 124
118 125
119 126
120 127
121 128
122 129
Chapter - 5 (Works)
123 130
124 131
125 132
126 (1) 133(1)
126 (2) 133(2
126 (3) 133(3)
126 (4) Deleted
127 134
128 135(1)
135(2)
129 (1) 136(1)
129 (2) 136(2)
129 (3) 136(3)
130 137
131 138
132 139
133 140
134 141
Chapter – 6 (Procurement of goods and services)
135 142
136 143
137 144
138 145
139 146
192
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
140 147
141 148
141 A (1) 149 (1)
149(2)
142 150
151
143 152
144 153
145 154
146 155
147(1) 156(1)
147 (2) 156(2)
148 157
149 158
159
160
150 161
151 162
152 163
164
153 165
154 166
167
155 168
156 169
157 170
158 171
159 (1) 172(1)
159 (2) 172(2)
160 173
161 174
175
162 176
177
163 178
164 179
165 180
166 181
167 182
168 183
169 184
170 185
193
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
171 186
172 187
173 188
174 189
175 190
191
192
193
176 194
177 195
196
197
178 198
179 199
180 200
181 201
182 202
183 203
184 204
185 205
206
Chapter – 7 (Inventory Management)
186 207
187 (1) 208(1)
187 (2) 208(2)
187 (3) 208(3)
188 (1) 209(1)
188 (2) 209(2)
188 (3) 209(3)
188 (4) 209(4)
189 210
190 (1) 211(i)
190 (2) 211(ii)
191 212
192 (1) 213(1)
192 (2) 213(2)
192 (3) 213(3)
193 214
194 215
195 216
196 217
197 218
194
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
198 219
199 220
200 221
201 222
202 (1) 223(1)
202 (2) 223(2)
202 (3) 223(3)
Chapter – 8 (Contract Management)
203 (1) 224(1)
203 (2) 224(2)
204 225
205 (1) 226(1)
205 (2) 226(2)
205 (3) 227
Chapter – 9 (Grants-in-aid and Loans)
206 228
207 DELETED
208 229
209 (1) 230(1)
209 (2) 230(2)
209 (3) 230(3)
209 (4) 230(4)
209 (5) 230(5)
230(6)
230(7)
230(8)
230(9)
209 (6) 230(10)
230(11)
230(12)
230(13)
230(14)
230(15)
230(16)
230(17)
231(1)
231(2)
231(3)
232
233
234
210 235
195
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
211 (1) 236(1)
211 (2) 236(2)
211 (3) 236(3)
211 (4) 236(4)
237
212 (1) 238(1)
238(2)
238(3)
238(4)
212 (2) 238(5)
212(2) (ii) 238(6)
239
240
241
242
242(1)
212 (3) 242(2)
242(3)
212 (4) (shifted as Rule 234)
212 (5) (shifted as Rule 240)
212(6) (shifted as 241)
213 243
214 244
215 (1) 245(1)
215 (2) (shifted as Rule 232)
215 (3) (shifted as Rule 233)
216 246
217 247
218 248
219 (1) 249(1)
219 (2) 249(2)
220 (1) 250(1)
220 (2) 250(2)
220 (3) 250(3)
220 (4) 250(4)
221 (1) 251(1)
221 (2) 251(2)
222 (1) 252(1)
222 (2) 252(2)
222 (3) 252((3)
223 (1) 253(1)
223 (2) 253(2)
196
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
224 254
225 255
226 (1) 256(1)
226 (2) 256(2)
227 257
228 (1) 258(1)
228 (2) 258(2)
228 (3) 258(3)
228 (4) 258(4)
229 259
230 (1) 260((1)
230 (2) 260(2)
231 261
232 262
233 263
Chapter – 10 (Budgeting and Accounting of Externally Aided Projects)
234 (1) 264(1)
234 (2) 264(2)
234 (3) 264(3)
234 (4) 264(4)
235 265
236 266
237 267
237(1) 267(1)
237(2) 267(2)
238 (1) 268(1)
238 (2) 268(2)
238 (3) 268(3)
239 269
240 270
241 271
242 272
243 273
244 274
Chapter – 11 (Government Guarantees)
245 275(1)
275(2
275(3)
276
246 (1) 277
246 (2)
247 278
197
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
248 (1) 279(1)
248(2) 279(2)
279(3)
279(4)
279(5)
280
249 (1) 281(1)
249 (2) 281(2)
249 (3) 281(3)
249 (4) 281(4)
250 282
251 283(1)
283(2)
283(3)
252 Shifted to 277 (vi)
Chapter – 12 (Miscellaneous Subjects)
253 (1) 284((1)
253 (2) 284(2)
253 (3) 284(3)
253 (4) 284(4)
285
254
255 (1) 286(1)
255 (2) 286(2)
255 (3) 286(3)
256 287
257 (1) 288(1)
257 (2) 288(2)
257 (3) 288(3)
257 (4) 288(4)
288(5)
258 289
259 290
260 291
261 292
262 293
263 294
264 (1) 295(1)
264 (2) 295(2)
264 (3) 295(3)
265 (1) 296(1)
265 (2) 296(2)
266 297
267 298
198
CONCORDANCE
TABLE
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
GFR 2005 GFR 2017
268 299
269 300
270 (1) 301(1)
270 (2) 301(2)
270 (3) 301(3)
270 (4) 301(4)
270 (5) 301(5)
271 302
272 303
273 304(1)
304(2)
274 (1) 305(1)
274 (2) 305(2)
275 (1) 306(1)
275 (2) 306(2)
275 (3) 306(3)
275 (4) 306(4)
276 307
277 308
278 309
279 (1) 310(1)
279(2) 310(2)
279 (3) 310(3)
279 (4) 310(4)
279 (5) 310(5)
280 311
281 (1) 312(1)
281 (2) 312(2)
282 313
283 314
284 315
285 316
286 317
287 318
288 319
289 320(1)
329(2)
290 321
291 322
292 (1) 323(1)
292 (2) 323(2)
293 324
199
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
200
NOTES NOTES
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
201
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
202
NOTES NOTES
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
203
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
204
NOTES NOTES
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
205
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
206
NOTES NOTES
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
207
NOTES
GENERAL FINANCIAL RULES 2017
Ministry of Finance
Department of Expenditure
NOTES
208
